The Project Gutenberg eBook of Psychology of the Unconscious
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Psychology of the Unconscious


Author: C. G. Jung

Translator: Beatrice M. Hinkle

Release date: July 23, 2021 [eBook #65903]

Language: English

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS ***



                     PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS


[Illustration: DR. C. G. JUNG
“PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS”]




                     PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS

     _A Study of the Transformations and Symbolisms of the Libido_
      _A Contribution to the History of the Evolution of Thought_


                                    BY

                              DR. C. G. JUNG
                       Of the University of Zurich

              AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION, WITH INTRODUCTION, BY
                         BEATRICE M. HINKLE, M.D.
 Of the Neurological Department of Cornell University Medical School and
               of the New York Post Graduate Medical School

[Illustration]

                        MOFFAT, YARD AND COMPANY
                                NEW YORK
                                  1916




                          Copyright, 1916, by
                        MOFFAT, YARD AND COMPANY
                                NEW YORK


                         _All rights reserved_




                           TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


That humanity is seeking a new message, a new light upon the meaning of
life, and something tangible, as it were, with which it can work towards
a larger understanding of itself and its relation to the universe, is a
fact I think none will gainsay. Therefore, it has seemed to me
particularly timely to introduce to the English-speaking world Dr.
Jung’s remarkable book, “Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido.” In this
work he has plunged boldly into the treacherous sea of mythology and
folklore, the productions of the ancient mind and that of the common
people, and turned upon this vast material the same scientific and
painstaking method of psychologic analysis that is applied to the modern
mind, in order to reveal the common bond of desire and longing which
unites all humanity, and thus bridge the gaps presumed to exist between
ancient and widely separated peoples and those of our modern time. The
discovery of this undercurrent affecting and influencing ancient peoples
as well as modern serves as a foundation or platform from which he
proceeds to hold aloft a new ideal, a new goal of attainment possible of
achievement and which can be intellectually satisfying, as well as
emotionally appealing: the goal of _moral autonomy_.

This book, remarkable for its erudition and the tremendous labor
expended upon it, as well as for the new light which it sheds upon human
life, its motives, its needs and its possibilities, is not one for
desultory reading or superficial examination. Such an approach will
prevent the reader from gaining anything of its real value; but for
those who can bring a serious interest and willingness to give a careful
study to it the work will prove to be a veritable mine capable of
yielding the greatest riches.

The difficulties in translating a book such as this are almost
insuperable, but I have tried faithfully to express Dr. Jung’s thought,
keeping as close to the original text as possible and, at the same time,
rendering the difficult material and complicated German phrasing as
simply and clearly as the subject-matter would allow. In all this work I
owe much to Miss Helen I. Brayton, without whose faithful assistance the
work would never have been completed. I wish to acknowledge my gratitude
to Mr. Louis Untermeyer, whose help in rendering the poetic quotations
into English verse has been invaluable, and to express as well my
gratitude to other friends who have assisted me in various ways from
time to time.

                                                                B. M. H.

 NEW YORK, 1915.




       AN INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOANALYSIS AND ANALYTIC PSYCHOLOGY


When Professor Freud of Vienna made his early discoveries in the realm
of the neuroses, and announced that the basis and origin of the various
symptoms grouped under the terms hysteria and neuroses lay in
unfulfilled desires and wishes, unexpressed and unknown to the patient
for the most part, and concerned chiefly with the sexual instinct, it
was not realized what far-reaching influence this unpopular and bitterly
attacked theory would exert on the understanding of human life in
general.

For this theory has so widened in its scope that its application has now
extended beyond a particular group of pathologic states. It has in fact
led to a new evaluation of the whole conduct of human life; a new
comprehension has developed which explains those things which formerly
were unexplained, and there is offered an understanding not only of the
symptoms of a neurosis and the phenomena of conduct but the product of
the mind as expressed in myths and religions.

This amazing growth has proceeded steadily in an ever-widening fashion
despite opposition as violent as any of which we have knowledge in the
past. The criticism originally directed towards the little understood
and much disliked sexual conception now includes the further teachings
of a psychology which by the application to it of such damning phrases
as mystical, metaphysical and sacrilegious, is condemned as
unscientific.

To add to the general confusion and misunderstanding surrounding this
new school of thought there has arisen a division amongst the leaders
themselves, so that there now exist two schools led respectively by
Professor Sigmund Freud of Vienna and Dr. Carl Jung of Zurich, referred
to in the literature as the Vienna School and the Zurich School.

It is very easy to understand that criticism and opposition should
develop against a psychology so difficult of comprehension, and so
disturbing to the ideas which have been held by humanity for ages; a
psychology which furthermore requires a special technique as well as an
observer trained to recognize and appreciate in psychologic phenomena a
verification of the statement that there is no such thing as chance, and
that every act and every expression has its own meaning, determined by
the inner feelings and wishes of the individual.

It is not a simple matter to come out boldly and state that every
individual is to a large extent the determiner of his own destiny, for
only by poets and philosophers has this idea been put forth—not by
science; and it is a brave act to make this statement with full
consciousness of all its meaning, and to stand ready to prove it by
scientific reasoning and procedure.

Developed entirely through empirical investigation and through an
analysis of individual cases, Freudian psychology seems particularly to
belong to that conception of Max Müller’s that “An empirical
acquaintance with facts rises to a scientific knowledge of facts as soon
as the mind discovers beneath the multiplicity of single productions the
unity of an organic system.”[1]

Psychoanalysis is the name given to the method developed for reaching
down into the hidden depths of the individual to bring to light the
underlying motives and determinants of his symptoms and attitudes, and
to reveal the unconscious tendencies which lie behind actions and
reactions and which influence development and determine the relations of
life itself. The result of digging down into the hidden psyche has been
to produce a mass of material from below the threshold of consciousness,
so astonishing and disturbing and out of relation with the previously
held values, as to arouse in any one unfamiliar with the process the
strongest antagonism and criticism.

Although originally studied only as a therapeutic method for the sick it
was soon realized through an analysis of normal people how slight were
the differences in the content of the unconscious of the sick and of the
normal. The differences observed were seen to be rather in the reactions
to life and to the conflicts produced by contending forces in the
individual.

These conflicts, usually not fully perceived by the individual, and
having to do with objectionable desires and wishes that are not in
keeping with the conscious idea of self, produce marked effects which
are expressed either in certain opinions, prejudices, attitudes of
conduct, faulty actions, or in some definite pathologic symptom. As Dr.
Jung says, he who remains healthy has to struggle with the same
complexes that cause the neurotic to fall ill.

In a valuable book called “The Neighbor,” written by the late Professor
N. Shaler of Harvard University, there occurs this very far-reaching
statement: “It is hardly too much to say that all the important errors
of conduct, all the burdens of men or of societies are caused by the
inadequacies in the association of the primal animal emotions with those
mental powers which have been so rapidly developed in mankind.”

This statement, reached by a process of reasoning and a method of
thought and study entirely different from psychoanalysis, nevertheless
so completely expresses in brief form the very basis of the postulates
developed through psychoanalysis that I quote it here. Such a statement
made in the course of a general examination of human relations does not
arouse opposition nor seem to be so difficult of acceptance. It appears
to be the individual application of these conceptions that has roused
such bitter antagonism and violent denunciations.

Rightly understood and used, psychoanalysis may be compared to surgery,
for psychoanalysis stands in the same relation to the personality as
surgery does to the body, and they aim at parallel results.

It is well recognized that in the last analysis nature is the real
physician, the healer of wounds; but prior to the development of our
modern asepsis and surgical technique the healing produced by nature was
most often of a very faulty and imperfect type—hideous scars, distorted
and crippled limbs, with functions impaired or incapacitated, resulted
from the wounds, or else nature was unable to cope with the hurt and the
injured one succumbed.

Science has been steadily working for centuries with the aim of
understanding nature and finding means to aid and co-operate with her so
that healing could take place with the least possible loss of function
or permanent injury to the individual. Marvelous results have rewarded
these persistent efforts, as the brilliant achievements of surgery
plainly indicate.

Meantime, however, little thought was given to the possibility of any
scientific method being available to help man overcome the wounds and
conflicts taking place in his soul, hurts which retarded his development
and progress as a personality, and which frequently in the struggle
resulted in physical pains and symptoms of the most varied character.
That was left solely to religion and metaphysics. Now, however, this
same assistance that surgery has given to the physical body,
psychoanalysis attempts to give to the personality. That it cannot
always succeed is as much to be expected, and more, than that surgery
does not always succeed, for the analytic work requires much of the
individual. No real result can be attained if he has not already
developed a certain quality of character and intelligence which makes it
possible for him to submit himself to a facing of his naked soul, and to
the pain and suffering which this often entails. Here, as in no other
relation in life, an absolute truth and an absolute honesty are the only
basis of action, since deception of any kind deceives no one but the
individual himself and acts as a boomerang, defeating his own aims.

Such deep searching and penetrating into the soul is not something to be
undertaken lightly nor to be considered a trivial or simple matter, and
the fact is that where a strong compulsion is lacking, such as sickness
or a situation too difficult to meet, much courage is required to
undertake it.

In order to understand this psychology which is pervading all realms of
thought and seems destined to be a new psychological-philosophical
system for the understanding and practical advancement of human life, it
will be necessary to go somewhat into detail regarding its development
and present status. For in this new direction lies its greatest value
and its greatest danger.

The beginnings of this work were first published in 1895 in a book
entitled “Studien über Hysterie,” and contained the joint investigations
into hysteria of Dr. Breuer of Vienna and his pupil Dr. Sigmund Freud.
The results of their investigations seemed to show that the various
symptoms grouped under the title of hysteria were the result of
emotionally colored reminiscences which, all unknown to the conscious
waking self, were really actively expressing themselves through the
surrogate form of symptoms and that these experiences, although
forgotten by the patient, could be reproduced and the emotional content
discharged.

Hypnosis was the means used to enable the physician to penetrate deeply
into the forgotten memories, for it was found through hypnosis that
these lost incidents and circumstances were not really lost at all but
only dropped from consciousness, and were capable of being revived when
given the proper stimuli. The astonishing part about it was that with
the revival of these memories and their accompanying painful and
disturbing emotions, the symptoms disappeared. This led naturally to the
conclusion that these symptoms were dependent upon some emotional
disturbance or psychic trauma which had been inadequately expressed, and
that in order to cure the patient one merely had to establish the
connection between the memory and the emotions which properly belonged
to it, letting the emotion work itself out through a reproduction of the
forgotten scene.

With further investigation Freud found that hypnosis was unnecessary for
the revival of the forgotten experiences, and that it was possible to
obtain the lost emotional material in the conscious and normal state.
For this purpose the patient was encouraged to assume a passive,
non-critical attitude and simply let his thoughts flow, speaking of
whatever came into his mind, holding nothing back. During this free and
easy discussion of his life and conditions, directed by the law of
association of ideas, reference was invariably made to the experiences
or thoughts which were the most affective and disturbing elements. It
was seen to be quite impossible to avoid this indirect revelation
because of the strength of the emotions surrounding these ideas and the
effect of the conscious wish to repress unpleasant feelings. This
important group of ideas or impressions, with the feelings and emotions
clustered around them which are betrayed through this process, was
called by Jung a _complex_.

However, with the touching of the _complex_ which always contains
feelings and emotions so painful or unpleasant as to be unacceptable to
consciousness, and which are therefore repressed and hidden, great
difficulties appeared, for very often the patient came to a sudden stop
and could apparently recall nothing more. Memory gaps were frequent,
relations twisted, etc. Evidently some force banished these memories so
that the person was quite honest in saying that he could remember
nothing or that there was nothing to tell. This kind of forgetfulness
was called _repression_, and is the normal mechanism by which nature
protects the individual from such painful feelings as are caused by
unpleasant and unacceptable experiences and thoughts, the recognition of
his egoistic nature, and the often quite unbearable conflict of his
weaknesses with his feelings of idealism.

At this early time great attention was given towards developing a
technique which would render more easy the reproduction of these
forgotten memories, for with the abandonment of hypnosis it was seen
that some unknown active force was at work which not only banished
painful memories and feelings, but also prevented their return; this was
called _resistance_. This resistance was found to be the important
mechanism which interfered with a free flow of thought and produced the
greatest difficulty in the further conduct of the analysis. It appeared
under various guises and frequently manifested itself in intellectual
objections based on reasoning ground, in criticism directed towards the
analyst, or in criticism of the method itself, and finally, often in a
complete blocking of expression, so that until the resistance was broken
nothing more could be produced.

It was necessary then to find some aid by which these resistances could
be overcome and the repressed memories and feelings revived and set
free. For it was proven again and again that even though the person was
not at all aware of concealing within himself some emotionally
disturbing feeling or experience with which his symptoms were
associated, yet such was the fact, and that under proper conditions this
material could be brought into consciousness. This realm where these
unknown but disturbing emotions were hidden was called the
“Unconscious”—the “Unconscious” also being a name used arbitrarily to
indicate all that material of which the person is not aware at the given
time—the not-conscious.

This term is used very loosely in Freudian psychology and is not
intended to provoke any academic discussion but to conform strictly to
the dictionary classification of a “negative concept which can neither
be described nor defined.” To say that an idea or feeling is unconscious
merely means to indicate that the individual is unaware at that time of
its existence, or that all the material of which he is unaware at a
given time is unconscious.

With the discovery of the significance in relation to hysteria of these
varied experiences and forgotten memories which always led into the
erotic realm and usually were carried far back into early childhood, the
theory of an infantile sexual trauma as a cause of this neurosis
developed. Contrary to the usual belief that children have no sexuality
and that only at puberty does it suddenly arise, it was definitely shown
that there was a very marked kind of sexuality among children of the
most tender years, entirely instinctive and capable of producing a grave
effect on the entire later life.

However, further investigations carried into the lives of normal people
disclosed quite as many psychic and sexual traumas in their early
childhood as in the lives of the patients; therefore, the conception of
the “infantile sexual trauma” as the etiological factor was abandoned in
favor of “the infantilism of sexuality” itself. In other words, it was
soon realized that many of the sexual traumas which were placed in their
early childhood by these patients, did not really exist except in their
own phantasies and probably were produced as a defence against the
memories of their own childish sexual activities. These experiences led
to a deep investigation into the nature of the child’s sexuality and
developed the ideas which Freud incorporated in a work called “Three
Contributions to the Sexual Theory.” He found so many variations and
manifestations of sexual activity even among young children that he
realized that this activity was the normal, although entirely
unconscious, expression of the child’s developing life, and while not
comparable to the adult sexuality, nevertheless produced a very definite
influence and effect on the child’s life.

These childish expressions of this instinct he called “polymorphous
perverse,” because in many ways they resembled the various abnormalities
called perversions when found among adults under certain conditions.

In the light of these additional investigations Freud was led to change
his formulation, for instead of the symptoms of the neurotic patient
being due to definite sexual experiences, they seemed to be determined
by his reactions towards his own sexual constitution and the kind of
repression to which these instincts were subjected.

Perhaps one of the greatest sources of misunderstanding and difficulty
in this whole subject lies in the term sexuality, for Freud’s conception
of this is entirely different from that of the popular sense. He
conceives sexuality to be practically synonymous with the word _love_
and to include under this term all those tender feelings and emotions
which have had their origin in a primitive erotic source, even if now
their primary aim is entirely lost and another substituted for it. It
must also be borne in mind that Freud strictly emphasizes the psychic
side of sexuality and its importance, as well as the somatic expression.

Therefore, to understand Freud’s theories, his very broad conception of
the term sexual must never be forgotten.

Through this careful investigation of the psychic life of the
individual, the tremendous influence and importance of phantasy-making
for the fate was definitely shown. It was discovered that the indulgence
in day-dreams and phantasies was practically universal not only among
children but among adults, that even whole lives were being lived out in
a phantastic world created by the dreamer, a world wherein he could
fulfil all those wishes and desires which were found to be too difficult
or impossible to satisfy in the world of reality.

Much of this phantasy thinking was seen to be scarcely conscious, but
arose from unrealized wishes, desires and strivings which could only
express themselves through veiled symbols in the form of phantastic
structures not understood, nor fully recognized. Indeed, it is perhaps
one of the most common human experiences to find “queer thoughts,”
undesired ideas and images, forcing themselves upon one’s attention to
such an extent that the will has to be employed to push them out of
mind. It is not unusual to discover long-forgotten impressions of
childhood assuming a phantastic shape in memory, and dwelt upon as
though they were still of importance.

This material afforded a rich field for the searchers into the soul, for
through the operation of the law of association of ideas these
phantastic products, traced back to their origin, revealed the fact that
instead of being meaningless or foolish, they were produced by a
definite process, and arose from distinct wishes and desires which
unconsciously veiled themselves in these mysterious forms and pictures.

It is conceded that the most completely unconscious product of an
individual is his dream, and therefore Professor Freud turned his
attention from phantasies and day-dreams to the investigation of the
nightly dreams of his patients to discover whether they would throw
light upon the painful feelings and ideas repressed out of
consciousness, and therefore inaccessible to direct revelation.

This brilliant idea soon led to a rich fruiting, for it became evident
that contrary to the usual conception that the dream is a phantastic and
absurd jumble of heterogeneous fragments, having no real relation to the
life of the individual, it is full of meaning. In fact, it is usually
concerned with the problem of life most pressing at the time, which
expresses itself not directly, but in symbolic form so as to be
unrecognized. In this way the individual gains an expression and
fulfilment of his unrealized wish or desire.

This discovery of the symbolic nature of the dream and the phantasy was
brought about entirely through the associative method and developed
empirically through investigations of the dreams of many people. In this
manner it became evident that certain ideas and objects which recurred
again and again in the dreams and phantasies of different people were
definitely associated with certain unconscious or unrecognized wishes
and desires, and were repeatedly used by the mind to express these
meanings where a direct form was repressed and unallowed. Thus certain
dream expressions and figures were in a general way considered to be
rather definite symbols of these repressed ideas and feelings found in
the unconscious. Through a comparative and parallel study it soon
appeared that there was a similar mechanism at work in myths and fairy
tales and that the relationship between the dreams and phantasies of an
individual and the myths and folk tales of a people was so close that
Abraham could say that the myth is a fragment of the infantile soul life
of the race and the dream is the myth of the individual.

Thus through relating his dreams the patient himself furnished the most
important means of gaining access to the unconscious and disturbing
complexes with which his symptoms were connected.

Besides the dream analysis the patient furnished other means of
revelation of his complexes—his mannerisms and unconscious acts, his
opening remarks to his physician, his emotional reactions to certain
ideas; in short the whole behavior and verbal expressions of the
individual reveal his inner nature and problems.

Through all this work it became clear that in the emotional nature lay
the origin not only of the various nervous illnesses themselves, but
also of the isolated symptoms and individual idiosyncrasies and
peculiarities which are the part of all humanity and that the pathogenic
cause of the disturbances lies not in the ignorance of individuals, but
in those inner resistances which are the underlying basis of this
ignorance.

Therefore the aim of the therapy became not merely the relief of the
ignorance but the searching out and combating of these resistances.

It becomes evident from even this brief description of the analytic
procedure that we are dealing with a very complex and delicate material,
and with a technique which needs to make definite use of all influences
available for the help of the patient. It has long been recognized that
the relation established between physician and patient has a great
effect upon the medical assistance which he is able to render—in other
words, if a confidence and personal regard developed in the patient
towards the physician, the latter’s advice was just so much more
efficacious. This personal feeling has been frankly recognized and made
of distinct service in psychoanalytic treatment under the name of
_transference_. It is through the aid of this definite relationship
which must be established in the one being analyzed towards the analyst
that it is possible to deal with the unconscious and organized
resistances which so easily blind the individual and render the
acceptance of the new valuations very difficult to the raw and sensitive
soul.

Freud’s emphasis upon the rôle of the sexual instinct in the production
of the neurosis and also in its determining power upon the personality
of the normal individual does not imply that he does not also recognize
other determinants at the root of human conduct, as for instance, the
instinct for preservation of life and the ego principle itself. But
these motives are not so violently forbidden and repressed as the sexual
impulse, and therefore, because of that repressive force and the
strength of the impulse he considers this primary in its influence upon
the human being.

The importance of this instinct upon human life is clearly revealed by
the great place given to it under the name of love in art, literature,
poetry, romance and all beauty from the beginning of recorded time.
Viewed in this light it cannot seem extraordinary that a difficulty or
disturbance in this emotional field should produce such far-reaching
consequences for the individual. The sexual impulse is often compared
with that of hunger, and this craving and need lying in all humanity is
called by Freud _libido_.


                          THE OEDIPUS PROBLEM

With further investigations into the nature of the repressed complexes a
very astonishing situation was revealed. The parental influence on
children is something so well recognized and understood that to call
attention to it sounds much like a banality. However, here an
extraordinary discovery was made, for in tracing out the feelings and
emotions of adults it became evident that this influence was paramount
not only for children but for adults as well; that the entire direction
of lives was largely determined quite unconsciously by the parental
associations, and that, although adults, the emotional side of their
nature was still infantile in type and demanded unconsciously the
infantile or childish relations.

Freud traces out the commencement of the infantile attachment for the
parents in this wise.

In the beginning the child derives its first satisfaction and pleasure
from the mother in the form of nutrition and care for its wants. In this
first act of suckling Freud sees already a kind of sexual pleasure, for
he apparently identifies the pleasure principle and the sexual instinct
and considers that the former is primarily rooted in the latter. At this
early time commence such various infantile actions unconnected with
nutrition as thumbsucking, various movements of the body as rubbing,
boring, pulling and other manifestations of a definite interest in its
own body, a delight in nakedness, the pleasure exhibited in inflicting
pain on some object and its opposite, the pleasure from receiving pain.
All of these afford the child pleasure and satisfaction, and because
they seem analogous to certain perversions in adults they are called by
Freud the “polymorphous perverse sexuality” of childhood. The character
of these instinctive actions which have nothing to do with any other
person, and through which the child attains pleasure from its own body,
caused Freud to term this phase of life as autoerotic after Havelock
Ellis. However, with the growth of the child there is a parallel
development of the psychic elements of its sexual nature and now the
mother, the original object of its love, primarily determined by its
helplessness and need, acquires a new valuation. The beginnings of the
need for a love object to satisfy the craving or libido of the child are
early in evidence and, following along sex lines in general, the little
son prefers the mother and the daughter the father after the usual
preference of the parents.

At this early time children feel deeply the enormous importance of their
parents and their entire world is bounded by the family circle. All the
elements of the ego which the child possesses have now become manifest;
love, jealousy, curiosity, hate, etc., and those instincts are directed
in the greatest degree towards the objects of their libido, namely the
parents. With the growing ego of the child there is a development of
strong wishes and desires demanding satisfaction which can only be
gratified by the mother; therefore there is aroused in the small son the
feeling of jealousy and anger towards the father in whom he sees a rival
for the affection of the mother and whom he would like to replace. This
desire in the soul of the child Freud calls the _Oedipus complex_ in
recognition of its analogy to the tragedy of King Oedipus who was drawn
by his fate to kill his father and win his mother for a wife. Freud
presents this as the _nuclear complex_ of every neurosis.

At the basis of this complex, some trace of which can be found in every
person, Freud sees a definite incest wish towards the mother which only
lacks the quality of consciousness. Because of moral reactions this wish
is quickly subjected to repression through the operation of the “incest
barrier,” a postulate he compares to the incest taboo found among
inferior peoples. At this time the child is beginning to develop its
typical sexual curiosity expressed by the question, “Where do I come
from?” The interest and investigation of the child into this problem,
aided by observations and deductions from various actions and attitudes
of the parents, who have no idea of the watchfulness of the child, lead
him, because of his imperfect knowledge and immature development, into
many false theories and ideas of birth. These infantile sexual theories
are held by Freud to be determinative in the development of the child’s
character and also for the contents of the unconscious as expressed in a
future neurosis.

These various reactions of the child and his sexual curiosity are
entirely normal and unavoidable, and if his development proceeds in an
orderly fashion then, at the time of definite object choice he will pass
smoothly over from the limitations of the family attachment out into the
world and find therein his independent existence.

However, if the libido remains fixed on the first chosen object so that
the growing individual is unable to tear himself loose from these
familial ties, then the incestuous bond is deepened with the developing
sexual instinct and its accompanying need of a love object, and the
entire future of the young personality endangered. For with the
development of the incestuous bond the natural repressions deepen
because the moral censor cannot allow these disturbing relations to
become clear to the individual. Therefore, the whole matter is repressed
more deeply into the unconscious, and even a feeling of positive enmity
and repulsion towards the parents is often developed in order to conceal
and over-compensate for the impossible situation actually present.

This persistence of the attachment of the libido to the original object,
and the inability to find in this a suitable satisfaction for the adult
need, interferes with the normal development of the psycho-sexual
character, and it is due to this that the adult retains that
“infantilism of sexuality” which plays so great a rôle in determining
the instability of the emotional life which so frequently leads into the
definite neuroses.


These were the conclusions reached and the ground on which Freudian
psychology rested, regarding the etiology of the neurosis, and the
tendencies underlying normal human mechanisms, when Dr. Carl Jung, the
most prominent of Freud’s disciples, and the leader of the Zurich
school, found himself no longer able to agree with Freud’s findings in
certain particulars, although the phenomena which Freud observed and the
technique of psychoanalysis developed by Freud were the material on
which Jung worked and the value of which he clearly emphasizes. The
differences which have developed lay in his understanding and
interpretation of the phenomena observed.

Beginning with the conception of libido itself as a term used to connote
sexual hunger and craving, albeit the meaning of the word sexual was
extended by Freud to embrace a much wider significance than common usage
has assigned it, Jung was unable to confine himself to this limitation.
He conceived this longing, this urge or push of life as something
extending beyond sexuality even in its wider sense. He saw in the term
libido a concept of unknown nature, comparable to Bergson’s élan vital,
a hypothetical energy of life, which occupies itself not only in
sexuality but in various physiological and psychological manifestations
such as growth, development, hunger, and all the human activities and
interests. This cosmic energy or urge manifested in the human being he
calls libido and compares it with the energy of physics. Although
recognizing, in common with Freud as well as with many others, the
primal instinct of reproduction as the basis of many functions and
present-day activities of mankind no longer sexual in character he
repudiates the idea of still calling them sexual, even though their
development was a growth originally out of the sexual. Sexuality and its
various manifestations Jung sees as most important channels occupied by
libido, but not the exclusive ones through which libido flows.

This is an energic concept of life; and from this viewpoint this
hypothetical energy of life or libido is a living power used
instinctively by man in all the automatic processes of his functioning;
such very processes being but different manifestations of this energy.
By virtue of its quality of mobility and change man, through his
understanding and intelligence, has the power consciously to direct and
use his libido in definite and desired ways.

In this conception of Jung will be seen an analogy to Bergson, who
speaks of “this change, this movement and becoming, this self-creation,
call it what you will, as the very stuff and reality of our being.”[2]

In developing the energic conception of libido and separating it from
Freud’s sexual definition, Jung makes possible the explanation of
interest in general, and provides a working concept by which not only
the specifically sexual, but the general activities and reactions of man
can be understood.

If a person complains of no longer having interest in his work or of
losing interest in his surroundings, then one understands that his
libido is withdrawn from this object and that in consequence the object
itself seems no longer attractive, whereas, as a matter of fact, the
object itself is exactly the same as formerly. In other words, it is the
libido that we bestow upon an object that makes it attractive and
interesting.

The causes for the withdrawal of libido may be various and are usually
quite different from those that the persons offer in explanation. It is
the task of psychoanalysis to discover the real reasons, which are
usually hidden and unknown. On the other hand, when an individual
exhibits an exaggerated interest or places an over-emphasis upon an idea
or situation, then we know there is too much libido here and that we may
find as a consequence a corresponding depletion elsewhere.

This leads directly into the second point of difference between Jung’s
views and those of Freud. This is concerned with those practically
universal childish manifestations of sexuality called by Freud
“polymorphous perverse” because of their similarity to those
abnormalities of sexuality which occur in adults and are called
perversions.

Jung takes exception to this viewpoint. He sees in the various
manifestations of childhood the precursors or forerunners of the later
fully developed sexuality, and instead of considering them perverse he
considers them preliminary expressions of sexual coloring. He divides
human life into three stages. The first stage up to about the third or
fourth year, generally speaking, he calls the presexual stage, for there
he sees the libido or life energy occupied chiefly in the functions of
nutrition and growth, and he draws an analogy between this period and
that of the caterpillar stage of the butterfly.

The second stage includes the years from this time until puberty, and
this he speaks of as the prepubertal stage.

The third period is that from puberty onward and can be considered the
time of maturity.

It is in the earliest stage, the period of which varies greatly in
different individuals, that are fully inaugurated those various
manifestations which have so marked a sexual coloring that there can be
no question of their relationship, although at that time sexuality in
the adult meaning of the word does not exist.

Jung explains the polymorphism of these phenomena as arising from a
gradual movement of the libido from exclusive service in the function of
nutrition into new avenues which successively open up with the
development of the child until the final inauguration of the sexual
function proper at puberty. Normally these childish bad habits are
gradually relinquished until the libido is entirely withdrawn from these
immature phases and with the ushering in of puberty for the first time
“appears in the form of an undifferentiated sexual primitive power,
clearly forcing the individual towards division, budding, etc.”

However, if in the course of its movement from the function of nutrition
to the sexual function the libido is arrested or retarded at any phase,
then a _fixation_ may result, creating a disturbance in the harmony of
the normal development. For, although the libido is retarded and remains
clinging to some childish manifestation, time goes on and the physical
growth of the child does not stand still. Soon a great contrast is
created between the infantile manifestations of the emotional life and
the needs of the more adult individual, and the foundation is thus
prepared for either the development of a definite neurosis or else for
those weaknesses of character or symptomatic disturbances which are not
sufficiently serious to be called a neurosis.

One of the most active and important forms of childish libido occupation
is in phantasy making. The child’s world is one of imagery and
make-believe where he can create for himself that satisfaction and
enjoyment which the world of reality so often denies. As the child grows
and real demands of life are made upon him it becomes increasingly
necessary that his libido be taken away from his phantastic world and
used for the required adaptation to reality needed by his age and
condition, until finally for the adult the freedom of the whole libido
is necessary to meet the biological and cultural demands of life.

Instead of thus employing the libido in the real world, however, certain
people never relinquish the seeking for satisfaction in the shadowy
world of phantasy and even though they make certain attempts at
adaptation they are halted and discouraged by every difficulty and
obstacle in the path of life and are easily pulled back into their inner
psychic world. This condition is called a state of _introversion_. It is
concerned with the past and the reminiscences which belong thereto.
Situations and experiences which should have been completed and finished
long ago are still dwelt upon and lived with. Images and matters which
were once important but which normally have no significance for their
later age are still actively influencing their present lives. The nature
and character of these phantasy products are legion, and are easily
recognized in the emotional attitudes and pretensions, the childish
illusions and exaggerations, the prejudices and inconsistencies which
people express in manifold forms. The actual situation is inadequately
faced; small matters are reacted towards in an exaggerated manner; or
else a frivolous attitude is maintained where real seriousness is
demanded. In other words, there is clearly manifested an inadequate
psychic adaptation towards reality which is quite to be expected from
the child, but which is very discordant in the adult.

The most important of these past influences is that of the parents.
Because they are the first objects of the developing childish love, and
afford the first satisfaction and pleasure to the child, they become the
models for all succeeding efforts, as Freud has worked out. This he
called the _nuclear_ or _root complex_ because this influence was so
powerful it seemed to be the determining factor in all later
difficulties in the life of the individual.

In this phase of the problem lies the third great difference between
Jung’s interpretation of the observed phenomena and that of Freud.

Jung definitely recognizes that there are many neurotic persons who
clearly exhibited in their childhood the same neurotic tendencies that
are later exaggerated. Also that an almost overwhelming effect on the
destiny of these children is exercised by the influence of the parents,
the frequent over-anxiety or tenderness, the lack of sympathy or
understanding, in other words, the complexes of the parent reacting upon
the child and producing in him love, admiration, fear, distrust, hate,
revolt. The greater the sensitiveness and impressionability of the
child, the more he will be stamped with the familial environment, and
the more he will unconsciously seek to find again in the world of
reality the model of his own small world with all the pleasures and
satisfactions, or disappointments and unhappinesses with which it was
filled.

This condition to be sure is not a recognized or a conscious one, for
the individual may think himself perfectly free from this past influence
because he is living in the real world, and because actually there is a
great difference between the present conditions and that of his childish
past. He sees all this, intellectually, but there is a wide gap between
the intellectual grasp of a situation and the emotional development, and
it is the latter realm wherein lies the disharmony. However, although
many ideas and feelings are connected with the parents, analysis reveals
very often that they are only subjective and that in reality they bear
little resemblance to the actual past situation. Therefore, Jung speaks
no longer of the real father and mother but uses the term imago or image
to represent the father or mother, because the feelings and phantasies
frequently do not deal with the real parents but with the distorted and
subjective image created by the imagination of the individual.

Following this distinction Jung sees in the Oedipus complex of Freud
only a symbol for the “childish desire towards the parents and for the
conflict which this craving evokes,” and cannot accept the theory that
in this early stage of childhood the mother has any real sexual
significance for the child.

The demands of the child upon the mother, the jealousy so often
exhibited, are at first connected with the rôle of the mother as
protector, caretaker and supplier of nutritive wants, and only later,
with the germinating eroticism, does the child’s love become admixed
with the developing sexual quality. The chief love objects are still the
parents and he naturally continues to seek and to find in them
satisfaction for all his desires. In this way the typical conflict is
developed which in the son is directed towards the father and in the
daughter towards the mother. This jealousy of the daughter towards the
mother is called the _Electra complex_ from the myth of Electra who took
revenge on her mother for the murder of the husband because she was in
this way deprived of her father.

Normally as puberty is attained the child gradually becomes more or less
freed from his parents, and upon the degree in which this is
accomplished depends his health and future well-being.

This demand of nature upon the young individual to free himself from the
bonds of his childish dependency and to find in the world of reality his
independent existence is so imperious and dominating that it frequently
produces in the child the greatest struggles and severest conflicts, the
period being characterized symbolically as a _self-sacrifice_ by Jung.

It frequently happens that the young person is so closely bound in the
family relations that it is only with the greatest difficulty that he
can attain any measure of freedom and then only very imperfectly, so
that the libido sexualis can only express itself in certain feelings and
phantasies which clearly reveal the existence of the complex until then
entirely hidden and unrealized. Now commences the secondary struggle
against the unfilial and immoral feelings with a consequent development
of intense resistances expressing themselves in irritation, anger,
revolt and antagonism against the parents, or else in an especially
tender, submissive and yielding attitude which over-compensates for the
rebellion and reaction held within.

This struggle and conflict gives rise to the unconscious phantasy of
self-sacrifice which really means the sacrificing of the childish
tendencies and love type in order to free libido; for his nature demands
that he attain the capacity for the accomplishment of his own personal
fulfilment, the satisfaction of which belongs to the developed man and
woman.

This conception has been worked out in detail by Jung in the book which
is herein presented to English readers.

We now come to the most important of Jung’s conceptions in that it bears
practically upon the treatment of certain types of the neuroses and
stands theoretically in direct opposition to Freud’s hypothesis. While
recognizing fully the influence of the parents and of the sexual
constitution of the child, Jung refuses to see in this infantile past
the real cause for the later development of the illness. He definitely
places the cause of the pathogenic conflict _in the present moment_ and
considers that in seeking for the cause in the distant past one is only
following the desire of the patient, which is to withdraw himself as
much as possible from the present important period.

The conflict is produced by some important task or duty which is
essential biologically and practically for the fulfilment of the ego of
the individual, but before which an obstacle arises from which he
shrinks, and thus halted cannot go on. With this interference in the
path of progression libido is stored up and a _regression_ takes place
whereby there occurs a reanimation of past ways of libido occupation
which were entirely normal to the child, but which for the adult are no
longer of value. These regressive infantile desires and phantasies now
alive and striving for satisfaction are converted into symptoms, and in
these surrogate forms obtain a certain gratification, thus creating the
external manifestations of the neurosis. Therefore Jung does not ask
from what psychic experience or point of fixation in childhood the
patient is suffering, but what is the present duty or task he is
avoiding, or what obstacle in his life’s path he is unable to overcome?
What is the cause of his regression to past psychic experiences?

Following this theory Jung expresses the view that the elaborate
phantasies and dreams produced by these patients are really forms of
compensation or artificial substitutes for the unfulfilled adaptation to
reality. The sexual content of these phantasies and dreams is only
apparently and not actually expressive of a real sexual desire or incest
wish, but is a regressive employment of sexual forms to symbolically
express a present-day need when the attainment of the present ego demand
seems too difficult or impossible, and no adaptation is made to what is
possible for the individual’s capability.[3]

With this statement Jung throws a new light on the work of analytic
psychology and on the conception of the neurotic symptoms, and renders
possible of understanding the many apparent incongruities and
conflicting observations which have been so disturbing to the critics.


It now becomes proper to ask what has been established by all this mass
of investigation into the soul, and what is its value not only as a
therapeutic measure for the neurotic sufferer, but also for the normal
human being?

First and perhaps most important is the recognition of a definite
psychological determinism. Instead of human life being filled with
foolish, meaningless or purposeless actions, errors and thoughts, it can
be demonstrated that no expression or manifestation of the psyche,
however trifling or inconsistent in appearance, is really lawless or
unmotivated. Only a possession of the technique is necessary in order to
reveal, to any one desirous of knowing, the existence of the unconscious
determinants of his mannerisms, trivial expressions, acts and behavior,
their purpose and significance.

This leads into the second fundamental conception, which is perhaps even
less considered than the foregoing, and that is the relative value of
the conscious mind and thought. It is the general attitude of people to
judge themselves by their surface motives, to satisfy themselves by
saying or thinking “this is what I want to do or say” or “I intended to
do thus and so,” but somehow what one thought, one intended to say or
expected to do is very often the contrary of what actually is said or
done. Every one has had these experiences when the gap between the
conscious thought and action was gross enough to be observed. It is also
a well known experience to consciously desire something very much and
when it is obtained to discover that this in no wise satisfied or
lessened the desire, which was then transferred to some other object.
Thus one became cognizant of the fact that the feeling and idea
presented by consciousness as the desire was an error. What is the
difficulty in these conditions? Evidently some other directing force
than that of which we are aware is at work.

Dr. G. Stanley Hall uses a very striking symbol when he compares the
mind to an iceberg floating in the ocean with one-eighth visible above
the water and seven-eighths below—the one-eighth above being that part
called conscious and the seven-eighths below that which we call the
unconscious. The influence and controlling power of the unconscious
desires over our thoughts and acts are in this relative proportion.
Faint glimmers of other motives and interests than those we accept or
which we believe, often flit into consciousness. These indications, if
studied or valued accurately, would lead to the realization that
consciousness is but a single stage and but one form of expression of
mind. Therefore its dictum is but one, often untrustworthy, approach to
the great question as to what is man’s actual psychic accomplishment,
and as to what in particular is the actual soul development of the
individual.

A further contribution of equal importance has been the empiric
development of a dynamic theory of life; the conception that life is in
a state of flux—movement—leading either to construction or destruction.
Through the development man has reached he has attained the power by
means of his intelligence and understanding of definitely directing to a
certain extent this life energy or libido into avenues which serve his
interest and bring a real satisfaction for the present day.

When man through ignorance and certain inherent tendencies fails to
recognize his needs or his power to fulfil them, or to adapt himself to
the conditions of reality of the present time, there is then produced
that reanimation of infantile paths by which an attempt is made to gain
fulfilment or satisfaction through the production of symptoms or
attitudes.

The acceptance of these statements demands the recognition of the
existence of an infantile sexuality and the large part played by it in
the later life of the individual. Because of the power and imperious
influence exerted by the parents upon the child, and because of the
unconscious attachment of his libido to the original object, the mother,
and the perseverance of this first love model in the psyche, he finds it
very difficult, on reaching the stage of adult development and the time
for seeking a love object outside of the family, to gain a satisfactory
model.

It is exceedingly important for parents and teachers to recognize the
requirements of nature, which, beginning with puberty, imperiously
demand of the young individual a separation of himself from the parent
stem and the development of an independent existence. In our complex
modern civilization this demand of nature is difficult enough of
achievement for the child who has the heartiest and most intelligent
co-operation of his parents and environment—but for the one who has not
only to contend with his own inner struggle for his freedom but has in
addition the resistance of his parents who would hold him in his
childhood at any cost, because they cannot endure the thought of his
separation from them, the task becomes one of the greatest magnitude. It
is during this period when the struggle between the childish inertia and
nature’s urge becomes so keen, that there occur the striking
manifestations of jealousy, criticism, irritability all usually directed
against the parents, of defiance of parental authority, of runaways and
various other psychic and nervous disorders known to all.

This struggle, which is the first great task of mankind and the one
which requires the greatest effort, is that which is expressed by Jung
as the self-sacrifice motive—the sacrifice of the childish feelings and
demands, and of the irresponsibility of this period, and the assumption
of the duties and tasks of an individual existence.

It is this great theme which Jung sees as the real motive lying hidden
in the myths and religions of man from the beginning, as well as in the
literature and artistic creations of both ancient and modern time, and
which he works out with the greatest wealth of detail and painstaking
effort in the book herewith presented.

This necessitates a recognition and revaluation of the enormous
importance and influence of the ego and the sexual instinct upon the
thought and reaction of man, and also predicates a displacement of the
psychological point of gravity from the will and intellect to the realm
of the emotions and feelings. The desired end is a synthesis of these
two paths or the use of the intellect constructively in the service of
the emotions in order to gain for the best interest of the individual
some sort of co-operative reaction between the two.

No one dealing with analytic psychology can fail to be struck by the
tremendous and unnecessary burdens which man has placed upon himself,
and how greatly he has increased the difficulties of adaptation by his
rigid intellectual views and moral formulas, and by his inability to
admit to himself that he is actually just a human being imperfect, and
containing within himself all manner of tendencies, good and bad, all
striving for some satisfactory goal. Further, that the refusal to see
himself in this light instead of as an ideal person in no way alters the
actual condition, and that in fact, through the cheap pretense of being
able only to consider himself as a very virtuous person, or as shocked
and hurt when observing the “sins” of others, he actually is prevented
from developing his own character and bringing his own capacities to
their fullest expressions.

There is frequently expressed among people the idea of how fortunate it
is that we cannot see each other’s thoughts, and how disturbing it would
be if our real feelings could be read. But what is so shameful in these
secrets of the soul? They are in reality our own egoistic desires all
striving, longing, wishing for satisfaction, for happiness; those
desires which instinctively crave their own gratification but which can
only be really fulfilled by adapting them to the real world and to the
social group.

Why is it that it is so painful for man to admit that the prime
influence in all human endeavor is found in the ego itself, in its
desires, wishes, needs and satisfactions, in short, in its need for
self-expression and self-perpetuation, the evolutionary impetus in life?

The basis for the unpleasantness of this idea may perhaps be found in an
inner resistance in nature itself which forces man to include others in
his scheme, lest his own greedy desires should serve to destroy him. But
even with this inner demand and all the ethical and moral teachings of
centuries it is everywhere evident that man has only very imperfectly
learned that it is to his own interest to consider his neighbor and that
it is impossible for him to ignore the needs of the body social of which
he is a part. Externally, the recognition of the strength of the ego
impulse is objectionable because of the ideal conception that
self-striving and so-called selfish seeking are unworthy, ignoble and
incompatible with a desirable character and must be ignored at all cost.

The futility of this attitude is to be clearly seen in the failure after
all these centuries to even approximate it, as evidenced in our human
relations and institutions, and is quite as ineffectual in this realm as
in that of sexuality where the effort to overcome this imperious
domination has been attempted by lowering the instinct, and seeing in it
something vile or unclean, something unspeakable and unholy. Instead of
destroying the power of sexuality this struggle has only warped and
distorted, injured and mutilated the expression; for not without
destruction of the individual can these fundamental instincts be
destroyed. Life itself has needs and imperiously demands expression
through the forms created. All nature answers to this freely and simply
except man. His failure to recognize himself as an instrument through
which the life energy is coursing and the demands of which must be
obeyed, is the cause of his misery. Despite his possession of intellect
and self-consciousness, he cannot without disaster to himself refuse the
tasks of life and the fulfilment of his own needs. Man’s great task is
the adaptation of himself to reality and the recognition of himself as
an instrument for the expression of life according to his individual
possibilities.

It is in his privilege as a self-creator that his highest purpose is
found.

The value of self-consciousness lies in the fact that man is enabled to
reflect upon himself and learn to understand the true origin and
significance of his actions and opinions, that he may adequately value
the real level of his development and avoid being self-deceived and
therefore inhibited from finding his biological adaptation. He need no
longer be unconscious of the motives underlying his actions or hide
himself behind a changed exterior, in other words, be merely a series of
reactions to stimuli as the mechanists have it, but he may to a certain
extent become a self-creating and self-determining being.

Indeed, there seems to be an impulse towards adaptation quite as Bergson
sees it, and it would seem to be a task of the highest order to use
intelligence to assist one’s self to work with this impulse.


Through the investigation of these different avenues leading into the
hidden depths of the human being and through the revelation of the
motives and influences at work there, although astonishing to the
uninitiated, a very clear and definite conception of the actual human
relationship—brotherhood—of all mankind is obtained. It is this
recognition of these common factors basically inherent in humanity from
the beginning and still active, which is at once both the most hopeful
and the most feared and disliked part of psychoanalysis.

It is disliked by those individuals who have prided themselves upon
their superiority and the distinction between their reactions and
motives and those of ordinary mankind. In other words, they attempt to
become personalities through elevating themselves and lowering others,
and it is a distinct blow to discover that beneath these pretensions lie
the very ordinary elements shared in common by all. On the other hand,
to those who have been able to recognize their own weaknesses and have
suffered in the privacy of their own souls, the knowledge that these
things have not set them apart from others, but that they are the common
property of all and that no one can point the finger of scorn at his
fellow, is one of the greatest experiences of life and is productive of
the greatest relief.

It is feared by many who realize that in these painfully acquired
repressions and symptoms lie their safety and their protection from
directly facing and dealing with tendencies and characteristics with
which they feel unable to cope. The repression and the accompanying
symptoms indicate a difficulty and a struggle, and in this way are a
sort of compromise or substitute formation which permit, although only
in a wasteful and futile manner, the activity of the repressed
tendencies. Nevertheless, to analyze the individual back to his original
tendencies and reveal to him the meaning of these substitute formations
would be a useless procedure in which truly “the last state of that man
would be worse than the first” if the work ceased there. The aim is not
to destroy those barriers upon which civilized man has so painfully
climbed and to reduce him to his primitive state, but, where these have
failed or imperfectly succeeded, to help him to attain his greatest
possibilities with less expenditure of energy, by less wasteful methods
than nature provides. In this achievement lies the hopeful and valuable
side of this method—the development of the synthesis. It is hopeful
because now a way is opened to deal with these primitive tendencies
constructively, and render their effects not only harmless but useful,
by utilizing them in higher aims, socially and individually valuable and
satisfactory.

This is what has occurred normally in those individuals who seem capable
and constructive personalities; in those creative minds that give so
much to the race. They have converted certain psychological tendencies
which could have produced useless symptoms or destructive actions into
valuable productions. Indeed it is not uncommon for strong, capable
persons to state themselves that they knew they could have been equally
capable of a wasteful or destructive life. This utilization of the
energy or libido freed by removing the repressions and the lifting of
infantile tendencies and desires into higher purposes and directions
suitable for the individual at his present status is called
_sublimation_.

It must not be understood by this discussion that geniuses or wonderful
personalities can be created through analysis, for this is not the aim
of the procedure. Its purpose is to remove the inhibitions and
restrictions which interfere with the full development of the
personality, to help individuals attain to that level where they really
belong, and to prepare people to better understand and meet life whether
they are neurotic sufferers or so-called “normal people” with the
difficulties and peculiarities which belong to all.

This reasoning and method of procedure is only new when the application
is made to the human being. In all improvements of plants and animals
these general principles have been recognized and their teachings
constructively utilized.

Luther Burbank, that plant wizard whose work is known to all the world,
says, “A knowledge of the battle of the tendencies within a plant is the
very basis of all plant improvement,” and “it is not that the work of
plant improvement brings with it, incidentally, as people mistakenly
think, a knowledge of these forces, it is the knowledge of these forces,
rather, which makes plant improvement possible.”

Has this not been also the mistake of man regarding himself, and the
cause, partly at least, of his failure to succeed in actually reaching a
more advanced and stable development?

This recognition of man’s biological relationship to all life and the
practical utilization of this recognition, necessitates a readjustment
of thought and asks for an examination and reconsideration of the facts
of human conduct which are observable by any thoughtful person. A quiet
and progressive upheaval of old ideas has taken place and is still going
on. Analytic psychology attempts to unify and value all of the various
phenomena of man which have been observed and noted at different times
by isolated investigators of isolated manifestations and thus bring some
orderly sequence into the whole. It offers a method whereby the
relations of the human being biologically to all other living forms can
be established, the actual achievement of man himself adequately valued,
and opens a vista of the possibilities of improvement in health,
happiness and accomplishment for the human being.

                                                     BEATRICE M. HINKLE.

 =10 Gramercy Park.=




                             AUTHOR’S NOTE


My task in this work has been to investigate an individual phantasy
system, and in the doing of it problems of such magnitude have been
uncovered, that my endeavor to grasp them in their entirety has
necessarily meant only a superficial orientation toward those paths, the
opening and exploration of which may possibly crown the work of future
investigators with success.

I am not in sympathy with the attitude which favors the repression of
certain possible working hypotheses because they are perhaps erroneous,
and so may possess no lasting value. Certainly I endeavored as far as
possible to guard myself from error, which might indeed become
especially dangerous upon these dizzy heights, for I am entirely aware
of the risks of these investigations. However, I do not consider
scientific work as a dogmatic contest, but rather as a work done for the
increase and deepening of knowledge.

This contribution is addressed to those having similar ideas concerning
science.

In conclusion, I must render thanks to those who have assisted my
endeavors with valuable aid, especially my dear wife and my friends, to
whose disinterested assistance I am deeply indebted.

                                                             C. G. JUNG.

 ZURICH.




                                CONTENTS


                                                                      PAGE

        AUTHOR’S NOTE                                                xlvii


                                  PART I

 CHAPTER

        INTRODUCTION                                                     3

        Relation of the Incest Phantasy to the Oedipus Legend—Moral
        revulsion over such a discovery—The unity of the antique and
        modern psychology—Followers of Freud in this field—The need
        of analyzing historical material in relation to individual
        analysis.


 I.—    CONCERNING THE TWO KINDS OF THINKING                             8

        Antiquity of the belief in dreams—Dream-meanings
        psychological, not literal—They concern wish-fulfilments—A
        typical dream: the sexual assault—What is symbolic in our
        every-day thinking?—One kind of thinking: intensive and
        deliberate, or directed—Directed thinking and thinking in
        words—Origin of speech in primitive nature sounds—The
        evolution of speech—Directed thinking a modern
        acquisition—Thinking, not directed, a thinking in images:
        akin to dreaming—Two kinds of thinking: directed and dream
        or phantasy thinking—Science an expression of directed
        thinking—The discipline of scholasticism as a
        forerunner—Antique spirit created not science but
        mythology—Their world of subjective phantasies similar to
        that we find in the childmind of to-day; or in the
        savage—The dream shows a similar type—Infantile thinking and
        dreams a re-echo of the prehistoric and the ancient—The
        myths a mass-dream of the people: the dream the myth of the
        individual—Phantastic thinking concerns wishes—Typical
        cases, showing kinship with ancient myths—Psychology of man
        changes but slowly—Phantastic thinking tells us of mythical
        or other material of undeveloped and no longer recognized
        wish tendencies in the soul—The sexual base—The wish,
        because of its disturbing nature, expressed not directly,
        but symbolically.


 II.—   THE MILLER PHANTASIES                                           42

        Miss Miller’s unusual suggestibility—Identifying herself
        with others—Examples of her autosuggestibility and
        suggestive effect—Not striking in themselves, but from
        analytic viewpoint they afford a glance into the soul of the
        writer—Her phantasies really tell of the history of her
        love.


 III.—  THE HYMN OF CREATION                                            49

        Miss Miller’s description of a sea-journey—Really a
        description of “introversion”—A retreat from reality into
        herself—The return to the real world with erotic impression
        of officer singing in the night-watch—The undervaluing of
        such erotic impressions—Their often deep effect—The
        succeeding dream, and poem—The denied erotic impression
        usurps an earlier transference: it expresses itself through
        the Father-Imago—Analysis of the poem—Relation to Cyrano,
        Milton and Job—The attempt to escape the problem by a
        religious and ethical pose—Contrast with real
        religion—Escape from erotic by transference to a God or
        Christ—This made effective by mutual transference: “Love one
        another”—The erotic spiritualized, however—The inner
        conflict kept conscious by this method—The modern, however,
        represses the conflict and so becomes neurotic—The function
        of Christianity—Its biologic purpose fulfilled—Its forms of
        thought and wisdom still available.


 IV.—   THE SONG OF THE MOTH                                            87

        The double rôle of Faust: creator and destroyer—“I came not
        to send peace, but a sword”—The modern problem of choice
        between Scylla of world-renunciation and Charybdis of
        world-acceptance—The ethical pose of The Hymn of Creation
        having failed, the unconscious projects a new attempt in the
        Moth-Song—The choice, as in Faust—The longing for the sun
        (or God) the same as that for the ship’s officer—Not the
        object, however: the longing is important—God is our own
        longing to which we pay divine honors—The failure to replace
        by a real compensation the libido-object which is
        surrendered, produces regression to an earlier and discarded
        object—A return to the infantile—The use of the parent
        image—It becomes synonymous with God, Sun, Fire—Sun and
        snake—Symbols of the libido gathered into the sun-symbol—The
        tendency toward unity and toward multiplicity—One God with
        many attributes: or many gods that are attributes of
        one—Phallus and sun—The sun-hero, the well-beloved—Christ as
        sun-god—“Moth and sun” then brings us to historic depths of
        the soul—The sun-hero creative and destructive—Hence: Moth
        and Flame: burning one’s wings—The destructiveness of being
        fruitful—Wherefore the neurotic withdraws from the conflict,
        committing a sort of self-murder—Comparison with Byron’s
        Heaven and Earth.


                                  PART II


 I.—    ASPECTS OF THE LIBIDO                                          127

        A backward glance—The sun the natural god—Comparison with
        libido—Libido, “sun-energy”—The sun-image as seen by the
        mystic in introversion—The phallic symbol of the
        libido—Faust’s key—Mythical heroes with phallic
        attributes—These heroes personifications of the human libido
        and its typical fates—A definition of the word “libido”—Its
        etymological context.


 II.—   THE CONCEPTION AND THE GENETIC THEORY OF LIBIDO                139

        A widening of the conception of libido—New light from the
        study of paranoia—The impossibility of restricting the
        conception of libido to the sexual—A genetic definition—The
        function of reality only partly sexual—Yet this, and other
        functions, originally derivations from procreative
        impulse—The process of transformation—Libido, and the
        conception of will in general—Examples in mythology—The
        stages of the libido: its desexualized derivatives and
        differentiations—Sublimation vs. repression—Splittings off
        of the primal libido—Application of genetic theory of libido
        to introversion psychoses—Replacing reality by archaic
        surrogates—Desexualizing libido by means of phantastic
        analogy formations—Possibly human consciousness brought to
        present state in this manner—The importance of the little
        phrase: “Even as.”


 III.—  THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE LIBIDO. A POSSIBLE SOURCE OF         157
        PRIMITIVE HUMAN DISCOVERIES

        An example of transition of the libido—Act of boring with
        forefinger: an infantile presexual activity—Similar
        activities in patient’s early childhood—Outcome in dementia
        præcox—Its phantasies related to mythological products: a
        reproduction of the creations of antiquity—The freeing of
        libido from the nutritive to enter the sexual function—The
        epoch of suckling and the epoch of displaced rhythmic
        activity—These followed by the beginnings of onanistic
        attempts—An obstacle in the sexual zone produces regression
        to a previous mode—These regressions easier in earlier
        stages of humanity than now—The ethnological phantasy of
        boring—Examples—The production of fire—Its sexual
        significance—A substitute for coitus—The invention of
        fire-making then due to the need of supplying a symbol for
        the sexual act—The psychological compulsion for such
        transitions of the libido based on an original division of
        the will—Regression to incestuous—Prohibition here sends
        incestuous component of libido back to presexual—Character
        of its application here—The substitution of Mother-Earth for
        the parent—Also of infantile boring—Leading then to
        discovery of fire—An example in Hindoo literature—The sexual
        significance of the mouth—Its other function: the mating
        call—The regression which produced fire through boring also
        elaborated the mating call—The beginnings of speech—Example
        from the Hindoo—Speech and fire the first fruits of
        transformation of libido—The fire-preparation regarded as
        forbidden, as robbery—The forbidden thing onanism—Onanism a
        cheating of sexuality of its purpose—The ceremonial
        fire-production a substitute for the possibility of
        onanistic regression—Thus a transformation of libido ensues.


 IV.—   THE UNCONSCIOUS ORIGIN OF THE HERO                             191

        The cause of introversion—The forward and backward flow of
        the libido—The abnormal third—The conflict rooted in the
        incest problem—The “terrible mother”—Miss Miller’s
        introversion—An internal conflict—Its product of hypnagogic
        vision and poem—The uniformity of the unconscious in all
        men—The unconscious the object of a true psychology—The
        individual tendency with its production of the hero cult—The
        love for the hero or god a love for the unconscious—A
        turning back to the mother of humanity—Such regressions act
        favorably within limits—Miss Miller’s mention of the
        Sphinx—Theriomorphic representations of the libido—Their
        tendency to represent father and mother—The Sphinx
        represents the fear of the mother—Miss Miller’s mention of
        the Aztec—Analysis of this figure—The significance of the
        hand symbolically—The Aztec a substitute for the Sphinx—The
        name Chi-wan-to-pel—The connection of the anal region with
        veneration—Chiwantopel and Ahasver, the Wandering Jew—The
        parallel with Chidher—Heroes generating themselves through
        their own mothers—Analogy with the Sun—Setting and rising
        sun: Mithra and Helios, Christ and Peter, Dhulqarnein and
        Chidher—The fish symbol—The two Dadophores: the two
        thieves—The mortal and immortal parts of man—The Trinity
        taken from phallic symbolism—Comparison of libido with
        phallus—Analysis of libido symbolism always leads back to
        the mother incest—The hero myth the myth of our own
        suffering unconscious—Faust.


 V.—    SYMBOLISM OF THE MOTHER AND OF REBIRTH                         233

        The crowd as symbol of mystery—The city as symbol of the
        mother—The motive of continuous “union”—The typical journey
        of the sun-hero—Examples—A longing for rebirth through the
        mother—The compulsion to symbolize the mother as City, Sea,
        Source, etc.—The city as terrible mother and as holy
        mother—The relation of the water-motive to rebirth—Of the
        tree-motive—Tree of life a mother-image—The bisexual
        character of trees—Such symbols to be understood
        psychologically, not anatomically—The incestuous desire aims
        at becoming a child again, not at incest—It evades incest by
        creating myths of symbolic rebirth—The libido spiritualized
        through this use of symbols—To be born of the spirit—This
        compulsion toward symbolism brings a release of forces bound
        up in incest—This process in Christianity—Christianity with
        its repression of the manifest sexual the negative of the
        ancient sexual cult—The unconscious transformation of the
        incest wish into religious exercise does not meet the modern
        need—A conscious method necessary, involving moral
        autonomy—Replacing belief by understanding—The history of
        the symbolism of trees—The rise of the idea of the terrible
        mother a mask of the incest wish—The myth of Osiris—Related
        examples—The motive of “devouring”—The Cross of Christ: tree
        of death and tree of life—Lilith: the devouring mother—The
        Lamias—The conquering of the mother—Snake and dragon: the
        resistance against incest—The father represents the active
        repulse of the incest wish of the son—He frequently becomes
        the monster to be overcome by the hero—The Mithraic
        sacrificing of the incest wish an overcoming of the mother—A
        replacing of archaic overpowering by sacrifice of the
        wish—The crucified Christ an expression of this
        renunciation—Other cross sacrifices—Cross symbol possesses
        significance of “union”—Child in mother’s womb: or man and
        mother in union—Conception of the soul a derivative of
        mother imago—The power of incest prohibition created the
        self-conscious individual—It was the coercion to
        domestication—The further visions of Miss Miller.


 VI.—   THE BATTLE FOR DELIVERANCE FROM THE MOTHER                     307

        The appearance of the hero Chiwantopel on horseback—Hero and
        horse equivalent of humanity and its repressed libido—Horse
        a libido symbol, partly phallic, partly maternal, like the
        tree—It represents the libido repressed through the incest
        prohibition—The scene of Chiwantopel and the
        Indian—Recalling Cassius and Brutus: also delirium of
        Cyrano—Identification of Cassius with his mother—His
        infantile disposition—Miss Miller’s hero also infantile—Her
        visions arise from an infantile mother transference—Her hero
        to die from an arrow wound—The symbolism of the arrow—The
        onslaught of unconscious desires—The deadly arrows strike
        the hero from within—It means the state of introversion—A
        sinking back into the world of the child—The danger of this
        regression—It may mean annihilation or new life—Examples of
        introversion—The clash between the retrogressive tendency in
        the individual unconscious and the conscious forward
        striving—Willed introversion—The unfulfilled sacrifice in
        the Miller phantasy means an attempt to renounce the mother:
        the conquest of a new life through the death of the old—The
        hero Miss Miller herself.


 VII.—  THE DUAL MOTHER ROLE                                           341

        Chiwantopel’s monologue—His quest for the “one who
        understands”—A quest for the mother—Also for the
        life-companion—The sexual element in the wish—The battle for
        independence from the mother—Its peril—Miss Miller’s use of
        Longfellow’s Hiawatha—An analysis of Hiawatha—A typical hero
        of the libido—The miraculous birth—The hero’s birth symbolic
        because it is really a rebirth from the mother-spouse—The
        twofold mother which in Christian mythology becomes twofold
        birth—The hero his own procreator—Virgin conception a mask
        for incestuous impregnation—Hiawatha’s early life—The
        identification of mother-nature with the mother—The killing
        of a roebuck a conquering of the parents—He takes on their
        strength—He goes forth to slay the father in order to
        possess the mother—Minnehaha, the mother—Hiawatha’s
        introversion—Hiding in the lap of nature really a return to
        the mother’s womb—The regression to the presexual revives
        the importance of nutrition—The inner struggle with the
        mother, to overpower and impregnate her—This fight against
        the longing for the mother brings new strength—The Mondamin
        motive in other myths—The Savior-hero the fruit of the
        entrance of the libido into the personal maternal
        depths—This is to die, and be born again—Hiawatha’s struggle
        with the fish-monster—A new deliverance from the mother—And
        so again with Megissogwon, the Magician—The hero must again
        and again conquer the mother—Then follows his marriage with
        Minnehaha—Other incidents, his death: the sinking of the sun
        in the west—Miss Miller also reminded by Chiwantopel’s
        longing of Wagner’s Siegfried—Analysis of the Siegfried
        myth—The treasure-guarding dragon—The dragon the son’s
        repressed longing for the mother—Symbolism of the cave—The
        separation from the mother, the hero’s conquering of the
        dragon—The symbolism of the cup—Drinking from the mother—Cup
        of the blood of Christ—The resultant mysterious union of
        man—Profane interpretations of this mystery—The phallic
        significance of the serpent—The snake as representing the
        introverting libido—Self-procreation: or creation of the
        world through introversion—The world thus an emanation of
        the libido—The hero himself a serpent—The psychoanalytic
        treatment of regression—The hidden libido touched upon
        causes a struggle: that is, the hero fights the fight with
        the treasure-guarding dragon—The awakening of
        Brunhilde—Siegfried finding his mother: a symbol of his own
        libido—The conquest of the terrible mother brings the love
        and life-giving mother.


 VIII.— THE SACRIFICE                                                  428

        Miss Miller’s vision again—The paradoxical striving of the
        libido away from the mother toward the mother—The destroying
        mother becomes beneficent on being conquered—Chiwantopel a
        hero of words, not deeds—He has not that will to live which
        breaks the magic circle of the incestuous—His identification
        with the author, and her wish for the parents—The end is the
        devouring of the daughter’s libido by the mother—Sexuality
        of the unconscious merely a symbol—Idle dreaming the mother
        of the fear of death—This downward path in the poetry of
        Hölderlin—The estrangement from reality, the introversion
        leading to death—The necessity of freeing libido for a
        complete devotion to life—Otherwise bound by unconscious
        compulsion: Fate—Sublimation through voluntary work—Creation
        of the world through cosmic sacrifice—Man discovers the
        world when he sacrifices the mother—The incest barrier as
        the producer of thought—Budding sexuality drawing the
        individual from the family—The mind dawns at the moment the
        child begins to be free of the mother—He seeks to win the
        world, and leave the mother—Childish regression to the
        presexual brings archaic phantasies—The incest problem not
        physical, but psychological—Sacrifice of the horse:
        sacrifice of the animal nature—The sacrifice of the “mother
        libido”: of the son to the mother—Superiority of Christian
        symbol: the sacrifice, not only of lower nature, but the
        whole personality—Miss Miller’s phantasy passes from
        sacrifice of the sexual, to sacrifice of the infantile
        personality—Problem of psychoanalysis, expressed
        mythologically, the sacrifice and rebirth of the infantile
        hero—The libido wills the destruction of its creation: horse
        and serpent—The end of the hero by means of earthquake—The
        one who understands him is the mother.




“_Therefore theory, which gives to facts their value and significance,
is often very useful, even if it is partially false, for it throws light
on phenomena which no one observed, it forces an examination, from many
angles, of facts which no one had hitherto studied, and it gives the
impulse for more extended and more productive researches._

“_It is, therefore, a moral duty for the man of science to expose
himself to the risk of committing error and to submit to criticism, in
order that science may continue to progress. A writer has attacked the
author for this very severely, saying, here is a scientific ideal very
limited and very paltry. But those who are endowed with a mind
sufficiently serious and impersonal as not to believe that all that they
write is the expression of truth absolute and eternal, approve of this
theory which places the aims of science well above the miserable vanity
and paltry ‘amour propre’ of the scientist._”—GUGLIELMO FERRERO.

         _Les Lois Psychologiques du Symbolisme—1895. Preface, p. viii._




                                 PART I




                              INTRODUCTION


Any one who can read Freud’s “Interpretation of the Dream” without
scientific rebellion at the newness and apparently unjustified daring of
its analytical presentation, and without moral indignation at the
astonishing nudity of the dream interpretation, and who can allow this
unusual array of facts to influence his mind calmly and without
prejudice, will surely be deeply impressed at that place where Freud
calls to mind the fact that an individual psychologic conflict, namely,
the Incest Phantasy, is the essential root of that powerful ancient
dramatic material, the Oedipus legend. The impression made by this
simple reference may be likened to that wholly peculiar feeling which
arises in us if, for example, in the noise and tumult of a modern street
we should come across an ancient relic—the Corinthian capital of a
walled-in column, or a fragment of inscription. Just a moment ago we
were given over to the noisy ephemeral life of the present, when
something very far away and strange appears to us, which turns our
attention to things of another order; a glimpse away from the incoherent
multiplicity of the present to a higher coherence in history. Very
likely it would suddenly occur to us that on this spot where we now run
busily to and fro a similar life and activity prevailed two thousand
years ago in somewhat other forms; similar passions moved mankind, and
man was likewise convinced of the uniqueness of his existence. I would
liken the impression which the first acquaintance with the monuments of
antiquity so easily leaves behind to that impression which Freud’s
reference to the Oedipus legend makes—for while we are still engaged
with the confusing impressions of the variability of the Individual
Soul, suddenly there is opened a revelation of the simple greatness of
the Oedipus tragedy—that never extinguished light of the Grecian
theatre.

This breadth of outlook carries in itself something of revelation. For
us, the ancient psychology has long since been buried among the shadows
of the past; in the schoolroom one could scarcely repress a sceptical
smile when one indiscreetly reckoned the comfortable matronly age of
Penelope and the age of Jocasta, and comically compared the result of
the reckoning with the tragic-erotic struggles in the legend and drama.
We did not know at that time (and who knows even to-day?) that the
mother can be the all-consuming passion of the son, which perhaps
undermines his whole life and tragically destroys it, so that not even
the magnitude of the Oedipus Fate seems one jot overdrawn. Rare and
pathologically understood cases like Ninon de Lenclos and her son[4] lie
too far removed from most of us to give a living impression. But when we
follow the paths traced out by Freud, we arrive at a recognition of the
present existence of such possibilities, which, although they are too
weak to enforce incest, are still strong enough to cause disturbances of
considerable magnitude in the soul. The admission of such possibilities
to one’s self does not occur without a great burst of moral revulsion.
Resistances arise which only too easily dazzle the intellect, and,
through that, make knowledge of self impossible. Whenever we succeed,
however, in stripping feelings from more scientific knowledge, then that
abyss which separates our age from the antique is bridged, and, with
astonishment, we see that Oedipus is still a living thing for us. The
importance of such an impression should not be undervalued. We are
taught by this insight that there is an identity of elementary human
conflicts existing independent of time and place. That which affected
the Greeks with horror still remains true, but it is true for us only
when we give up a vain illusion that we are different—that is to say,
more moral, than the ancients. We of the present day have nearly
succeeded in forgetting that an indissoluble common bond binds us to the
people of antiquity. With this truth a path is opened to the
understanding of the ancient mind; an understanding which so far has not
existed, and, on one side, leads to an inner sympathy, and, on the other
side, to an intellectual comprehension. Through buried strata of the
individual soul we come indirectly into possession of the living mind of
the ancient culture, and, just precisely through that, do we win that
stable point of view outside our own culture, from which, for the first
time, an objective understanding of their mechanisms would be possible.
At least that is the hope which we get from the rediscovery of the
Oedipus problem.

The enquiry made possible by Freud’s work has already resulted
fruitfully; we are indebted to this stimulation for some bold attacks
upon the territory of the history of the human mind. There are the works
of Riklin,[5] Abraham,[6] Rank,[7] Maeder,[8] Jones,[9]—recently
Silberer has joined their ranks with a beautiful investigation entitled
“Phantasie und Mythus.”[10] We are indebted to Pfister[11] for a
comprehensive work which cannot be overlooked here, and which is of much
importance for Christian religious psychology. The leading purpose of
these works is the unlocking of historical problems through the
application of psychoanalytic knowledge; that is to say, knowledge drawn
from the activity of the modern unconscious mind concerning specific
historical material.

I must refer the reader entirely to the specified works, in order that
he may gain information concerning the extent and the kind of insight
which has already been obtained. The explanations are in many cases
dubious in particulars; nevertheless, this detracts in no way from the
total result. It would be significant enough if only the far-reaching
analogy between the psychologic structure of the historical relics and
the structure of the recent individual psychologic products alone were
demonstrated. This proof is possible of attainment for every intelligent
person through the work done up to this time. The analogy prevails
especially in symbolism, as Riklin, Rank, Maeder, and Abraham have
pointed out with illuminating examples; it is also shown in the
individual mechanisms of unconscious work, that is to say in repression,
condensation, etc., as Abraham explicitly shows.

Up to the present time the psychoanalytic investigator has turned his
interest chiefly to the analysis of the individual psychologic problems.
It seems to me, however, that in the present state of affairs there is a
more or less imperative demand for the psychoanalyst to broaden the
analysis of the individual problems by a comparative study of historical
material relating to them, just as Freud has already done in a masterly
manner in his book on “Leonardo da Vinci.”[12] For, just as the
psychoanalytic conceptions promote understanding of the historic
psychologic creations, so reversedly historical materials can shed new
light upon individual psychologic problems. These and similar
considerations have caused me to turn my attention somewhat more to the
historical, in the hope that, out of this, new insight into the
foundations of individual psychology might be won.




                               CHAPTER I
                  CONCERNING THE TWO KINDS OF THINKING


It is a well-known fact that one of the principles of analytic
psychology is that the dream images are to be understood symbolically;
that is to say, that they are not to be taken literally just as they are
presented in sleep, but that behind them a hidden meaning has to be
surmised. It is this ancient idea of a dream symbolism which has
challenged not only criticism, but, in addition to that, the strongest
opposition. That dreams may be full of import, and, therefore, something
to be interpreted, is certainly neither a strange nor an extraordinary
idea. This has been familiar to mankind for thousands of years, and,
therefore, seems much like a banal truth. The dream interpretations of
the Egyptians and Chaldeans, and the story of Joseph who interpreted
Pharaoh’s dreams, are known to every one, and the dream book of
Artemidorus is also familiar. From countless inscribed monuments of all
times and peoples we learn of foreboding dreams, of significant, of
prophetic and also of curative dreams which the Deity sent to the sick,
sleeping in the temple. We know the dream of the mother of Augustus, who
dreamt she was to be with child by the Deity transformed into a snake.
We will not heap up references and examples to bear witness to the
existence of a belief in the symbolism of dreams. When an idea is so
old, and is so generally believed, it is probably true in some way, and,
indeed, as is mostly the case, _is not literally true, but is true
psychologically_. In this distinction lies the reason why the old fogies
of science have from time to time thrown away an inherited piece of
ancient truth; because it was not literal but psychologic truth. For
such discrimination this type of person has at no time had any
comprehension.

From our experience, it is hardly conceivable that a God existing
outside of ourselves causes dreams, or that the dream, eo ipso, foresees
the future prophetically. When we translate this into the psychologic,
however, then the ancient theories sound much more reconcilable, namely,
_the dream arises from a part of the mind unknown to us, but none the
less important, and is concerned with the desires for the approaching
day_. This psychologic formula derived from the ancient superstitious
conception of dreams, is, so to speak, exactly identified with the
Freudian psychology, which assumes a rising wish from the unconscious to
be the source of the dream.

As the old belief teaches, the Deity or the Demon speaks in symbolic
speech to the sleeper, and the dream interpreter has the riddle to
solve. In modern speech we say this means that the dream is a _series of
images, which are apparently contradictory and nonsensical, but arise in
reality from psychologic material which yields a clear meaning_.

Were I to suppose among my readers a far-reaching ignorance of dream
analysis, then I should be obliged to illustrate this statement with
numerous examples. To-day, however, these things are quite well known,
so that one must proceed carefully with every-day dream material, out of
consideration for a public educated in these matters. It is a special
inconvenience that no dream can be recounted without being obliged to
add to it half a life’s history which affords the individual foundations
of the dream, but there are some few typical dreams which can be told
without too great a ballast. One of these is the dream of the sexual
assault, which is especially prevalent among women. A girl sleeping
after an evening happily spent in dancing, dreams that a robber breaks
open her door noisily and stabs through her body with a lance. This
theme, which explains itself, has countless variations, some simple,
some complicated. Instead of the lance it is a sword, a dagger, a
revolver, a gun, a cannon, a hydrant, a watering pot; or the assault is
a burglary, a pursuit, a robbery, or it is some one hidden in the closet
or under the bed. Or the danger may be illustrated by wild animals; for
instance, a horse which throws the dreamer to the ground and kicks her
in the body with his hind foot; lions, tigers, elephants with
threatening trunks, and finally snakes in endless variety. Sometimes the
snake creeps into the mouth, sometimes it bites the breast like
Cleopatra’s legendary asp, sometimes it comes in the rôle of the
paradisical snake, or in the variations of Franz Stuck, whose pictures
of snakes bear the significant titles “Vice,” “Sin,” “Lust.” The mixture
of lust and anxiety is expressed incomparably in the very atmosphere of
these pictures, and far more brutally, indeed, than in Mörike’s charming
poem.

                  _The Maiden’s First Love Song_

                    What’s in the net?
                        Behold,
                    But I am afraid,
                    Do I grasp a sweet eel,
                    Do I seize a snake?
                        Love is a blind
                        Fisherwoman;
                        Tell the child
                        Where to seize.
                    Already it leaps in my hands.

                    Oh, Pity, or delight!
                    With nestlings and turnings
                        It coils on my breast,
                        It bites me, oh, wonder!
                        Boldly through the skin,
                        It darts under my heart.
                    Oh, Love, I shudder!

                    What can I do, what can I begin?
                        That shuddering thing;
                        There it crackles within
                        And coils in a ring.
                        It must be poisoned.
                        Here it crawls around.
                        Blissfully I feel as it worms
                        Itself into my soul
                        And kills me finally.

All these things are simple, and need no explanation to be intelligible.
Somewhat more complicated, but still unmistakable, is the dream of a
woman; she sees the triumphal arch of Constantine. A cannon stands
before it, to the right of it a bird, to the left a man. A shot flashes
out of the tube; the projectile hits her; it goes into her pocket, into
her purse. There it remains, and she holds her purse as if something
very precious were in it. The image disappears, and she continues to see
only the stock of the cannon, and over that Constantine’s motto, “In hoc
signo vinces.”

These few references to the symbolic nature of dreams are perhaps
sufficient. For whomsoever the proof may appear insufficient, and it is
certainly insufficient for a beginner, further evidence may be found in
the fundamental work of Freud, and in the works of Stekel and Rank which
are fuller in certain particulars. We must assume here that the dream
symbolism is an established fact, in order to bring to our study a mind
suitably prepared for an appreciation of this work. We would not be
successful if we, on the contrary, were to be astonished at the idea
that an intellectual image can be projected into our conscious psychic
activity; an image which apparently obeys such wholly other laws and
purposes than those governing the conscious psychic product.

_Why are dreams symbolic?_ Every “why” in psychology is divided into two
separate questions: first, _for what purpose are dreams symbolic_? We
will answer this question only to abandon it at once. Dreams are
symbolic in order that they can not be understood; in order that the
wish, which is the source of the dream, may remain unknown. The question
why this is so and not otherwise, leads us out into the far-reaching
experiences and trains of thought of the Freudian psychology.

Here the second question interests us, viz., _How is it that dreams are
symbolic?_ That is to say, from where does this capacity for symbolic
representation come, of which we, in our conscious daily life, can
discover apparently no traces?

Let us examine this more closely. Can we really discover nothing
symbolic in our every-day thought? Let us follow our trains of thought;
let us take an example. We think of the war of 1870 and 1871. We think
about a series of bloody battles, the siege of Strassburg, Belfort,
Paris, the Treaty of Peace, the foundation of the German Empire, and so
on. How have we been thinking? We start with an idea, or super-idea, as
it is also called, and without thinking of it, but each time merely
guided by a feeling of direction, we think about individual
reminiscences of the war. In this we can find nothing symbolic, and our
whole conscious thinking proceeds according to this type.[13]

If we observe our thinking very narrowly, and follow an intensive train
of thought, as, for example, the solution of a difficult problem, then
suddenly we notice that we are thinking in words, that in wholly
intensive thinking we begin to speak to ourselves, or that we
occasionally write down the problem, or make a drawing of it so as to be
absolutely clear. It must certainly have happened to any one who has
lived for some time in a foreign country, that after a certain period he
has begun to think in the language of the country. A very intensive
train of thinking works itself out more or less in _word form_; that is,
if one wants to express it, to teach it, or to convince any one of it.
Evidently it directs itself wholly to the outside world. To this extent,
this directed or logical thinking is a reality thinking,[14] having a
real existence for us; that is to say, a thinking which adjusts itself
to actual conditions,[15] where we, expressed in other words, imitate
the succession of objectively real things, so that the images in our
mind follow after each other in the same strictly causal succession as
the historical events outside of our mind.[16]

We call this thinking, thinking with directed attention. It has, in
addition, the peculiarity that one is tired by it, and that, on this
account, it is set into action only for a time. Our whole vital
accomplishment, which is so expensive, is adaptation to environment; a
part of it is the directed thinking, which, biologically expressed, is
nothing but a process of psychic assimilation, which, as in every vital
accomplishment, leaves behind a corresponding exhaustion.

The material with which we think is _language and speech concept_, a
thing which has been used from time immemorial as something external, a
bridge for thought, and which has a single purpose—that of
communication. As long as we think directedly, we think for others and
speak to others.[17]

Speech is originally a system of emotional and imitative sounds—sounds
which express terror, fear, anger, love; and sounds which imitate the
noises of the elements, the rushing and gurgling of water, the rolling
of thunder, the tumults of the winds, the tones of the animal world, and
so on; and, finally, those which represent a combination of the sounds
of perception and of affective reaction.[18] Likewise in the more or
less modern languages, large quantities of onomatopoetic relics are
retained; for example, sounds for the movement of water,—

  Rauschen, risseln, rûschen, rinnen, rennen, to rush, ruscello,
  ruisseau, river, Rhein.

  Wasser, wissen, wissern, pissen, piscis, fisch.

Thus language is originally and essentially nothing but a system of
signs or symbols, which denote real occurrences, or their echo in the
human soul.

Therefore one must decidedly agree with Anatole France,[19] when he
says,

  “What is thought, and how do we think? We think with words; that alone
  is sensual and brings us back to nature. Think of it! The
  metaphysician has only the perfected cry of monkeys and dogs with
  which to construct the system of the world. That which he calls
  profound speculation and transcendent method is to put end to end in
  an arbitrary order the natural sounds which cry out hunger, fear, and
  love in the primitive forests, and to which were attached little by
  little the meanings which one believed to be abstract, when they were
  only crude.

  “Do not fear that the succession of small cries, feeble and stifled,
  which compose a book of philosophy, will teach us so much regarding
  the universe, that we can live in it no longer.”

Thus is our directed thinking, and even if we were the loneliest and
furthest removed from our fellows, this thinking is nothing but the
first notes of a long-drawn-out call to our companions that water had
been found, that we had killed the bear, that a storm was approaching,
or that wolves were prowling around the camp. A striking paradox of
Abélard’s which expresses in a very intuitive way the whole human
limitation of our complicated thinking process, reads,—“_Sermo generatur
ab intellectu et generat intellectum_.”[20]

Any system of philosophy, no matter how abstract, represents in means
and purpose nothing more than an extremely cleverly developed
combination of original nature sounds.[21] Hence arises the desire of a
Schopenhauer or a Nietzsche for recognition and understanding, and the
despair and bitterness of their loneliness. One might expect, perhaps,
that a man full of genius could pasture in the greatness of his own
thoughts, and renounce the cheap approbation of the crowd which he
despises; yet he succumbs to the more powerful impulse of the herd
instinct. His searching and his finding, his call, belong to the herd.

When I said just now that directed thinking is properly a thinking with
words, and quoted that clever testimony of Anatole France as drastic
proof of it, a misunderstanding might easily arise, namely, that
directed thinking is really only “word.” That certainly would go too
far. Language should, however, be comprehended in a wider sense than
that of speech, which is in itself only the expression of the formulated
thought which is capable of being communicated in the widest sense.
Otherwise, the deaf mute would be limited to the utmost in his capacity
for thinking, which is not the case in reality. Without any knowledge of
the spoken word, he has his “language.” This language, considered from
the standpoint of history, or in other words, directed thinking, is here
a descendant of the primitive words, as, for instance, Wundt[22]
expresses it.

  “A further important result of that co-operation of sound and sign
  interchange consists in the fact that very many words gradually lose
  altogether their original concrete thought meaning, and turn into
  signs for general ideas and for the expression of the apperceptive
  functions of relation and comparison and their products. In this
  manner abstract thought develops, which, because it would not be
  possible without the change of meaning lying at the root of it, is
  indeed a production of that psychic and psychophysical reciprocal
  action out of which the development of language takes place.”

Jodl[23] denies the identity of language and thought, because, for one
reason, one and the same psychic fact might be expressed in different
languages in different ways. From that he draws the conclusion that a
“super-language thinking” exists. Certainly there is such a thing,
whether with Erdmann one considers it “hypologisch,” or with Jodl as
“super-language.” Only this is not logical thinking. My conception of it
agrees with the noteworthy contribution made by Baldwin, which I will
quote here word for word.[24]

  “The transmission from pre-judgmental to judgmental meaning is just
  that from knowledge which has social confirmation to that which gets
  along without it. The meanings utilized for judgment are those already
  developed in their presuppositions and applications through the
  confirmation of social intercourse. Thus, the personal judgment,
  trained in the methods of social rendering, and disciplined by the
  interaction of its social world, projects its content into that world
  again. In other words, the platform for all movement into the
  assertion of individual judgment—the level from which new experience
  is utilized—is already and always socialized; and it is just this
  movement that we find reflected in the actual results as the sense of
  the ‘appropriateness’ or synomic character of the meaning rendered.

  “Now the development of thought, as we are to see in more detail, is
  by a method essentially of trial and error, of experimentation, of the
  use of meanings as worth more than they are as yet recognized to be
  worth. The individual must use his own thoughts, his established
  knowledges, his grounded judgments, for the embodiment of his new
  inventive constructions. He erects his thought as we say
  ‘schematically’—in logic terms, ‘problematically,’ conditionally,
  disjunctively; projecting into the world an opinion still peculiar to
  himself, as if it were true. _Thus all discovery proceeds._ But this
  is, from the linguistic point of view, still to use the current
  language, still to work by meanings already embodied in social and
  conventional usage.

  “Language grows, therefore, just as thought does, by never losing its
  synomic or dual reference; its meaning is both personal and social.

  “It is the register of tradition, the record of racial conquest, the
  deposit of all the gains made by the genius of individuals.... The
  social copy-system, thus established, reflects the judgmental
  processes of the race, and in turn becomes the training school of the
  judgment of new generations.

  “Most of the training of the self, whereby the vagaries of personal
  reaction to fact and image are reduced to the basis of sound judgment,
  comes through the use of speech. When the child speaks, he lays before
  the world his suggestion for a general or common meaning. The
  reception he gets confirms or refutes him. In either case he is
  instructed. His next venture is now from a platform of knowledge on
  which the newer item is more nearly convertible into the common coin
  of effective intercourse. The point to notice here is not so much the
  exact mechanism of the exchange—secondary conversion—by which this
  gain is made, as the training in judgment that the constant use of it
  affords. In each case, effective judgment is the common judgment.

  “Here the object is to point out that it is secured by the development
  of a function _whose rise is directly ad hoc_, directly for the social
  experimentation by which growth in personal competence is advanced as
  well—_the function of speech_.

  “In language, therefore, to sum up the foregoing, we have the
  tangible—the actual—the historical—instrument of the development and
  conservation of psychic meaning. It is the material evidence and proof
  of the _concurrence of social and personal judgment_. In it synomic
  meaning, judged as ‘appropriate,’ becomes ‘social’ meaning, held as
  socially generalized and acknowledged.”

These arguments of Baldwin abundantly emphasize the wide-reaching
limitations of thinking caused by language.[25] These limitations are of
the greatest significance, both subjectively and objectively; at least
their meaning is great enough to force one to ask one’s self if, after
all, in regard to independence of thought, Franz Mauthner, thoroughly
sceptical, is not really correct in his view that thinking is speech and
nothing more. Baldwin expresses himself more cautiously and reservedly;
nevertheless, his inner meaning is plainly in favor of the primacy of
speech (naturally not in the sense of the spoken word); the directed
thinking, or as we might perhaps call it, the thinking in internal
speech, is the manifest instrument of culture, and we do not go astray
when we say that the powerful work of education which the centuries have
given to directed thinking has produced, just through the peculiar
development of thinking from the individual subjective into the social
objective, a practical application of the human mind to which we owe
modern empiricism and technic, and which occurs for absolutely the first
time in the history of the world. Inquisitive minds have often tormented
themselves with the question why the undoubtedly extraordinary knowledge
of mathematics and principles and material facts united with the
unexampled art of the human hand in antiquity never arrived at the point
of developing those known technical statements of fact, for instance,
the principles of simple machines, beyond the realm of the amusing and
curious to a real technic in the modern sense. There is necessarily only
one answer to this; the ancients almost entirely, with the exception of
a few extraordinary minds, lacked the capacity to allow their interest
to follow the transformations of inanimate matter to the extent
necessary for them to be able to reproduce the process of nature,
creatively and through their own art, by means of which alone they could
have succeeded in putting themselves in possession of the force of
nature. That which they lacked was training in directed thinking, or, to
express it psychoanalytically, the ancients did not succeed in tearing
loose the libido which might be sublimated, from the other natural
relations, and did not turn voluntarily to anthropomorphism. The secret
of the development of culture lies in the _mobility of the libido_, and
in its capacity for transference. It is, therefore, to be assumed that
the directed thinking of our time is a more or less modern acquisition,
which was lacking in earlier times.

But with that we come to a further question, viz., what happens if we do
not think directedly? Then our thinking lacks the major idea, and the
feeling of direction which emanates from that.[26] We no longer compel
our thoughts along a definite track, but let them float, sink and mount
according to their own gravity. According to Kulpe[27] thinking is a
kind of inner will action, the absence of which necessarily leads to an
automatic play of ideas. James understands the non-directed thinking, or
“merely associative” thinking, as the ordinary one. He expresses himself
about that in the following manner:

  “Our thought consists for the great part of a series of images, one of
  which produces the other; _a sort of passive dream-state of which the
  higher animals are also capable_. This sort of thinking leads,
  nevertheless, to reasonable conclusions of a practical as well as of a
  theoretical nature.

  “As a rule, the links of this sort of irresponsible thinking, which
  are accidentally bound together, are empirically concrete things, not
  abstractions.”

We can, in the following manner, complete these definitions of William
James. This sort of thinking does not tire us; it quickly leads us away
from reality into phantasies of the past and future. Here, thinking in
the form of speech ceases, image crowds upon image, feeling upon
feeling; more and more clearly one sees a tendency which creates and
makes believe, not as it truly is, but as one indeed might wish it to
be.[28] The material of these thoughts which turns away from reality,
can naturally be only the past with its thousand memory pictures. The
customary speech calls this kind of thinking “dreaming.”

Whoever attentively observes himself will find the general custom of
speech very striking, for almost every day we can see for ourselves how,
when falling asleep, phantasies are woven into our dreams, so that
between the dreams of day and night there is not so great a difference.
Thus we have two forms of thinking—_directed thinking_ and _dream or
phantasy thinking_. The first, working for communication with speech
elements, is troublesome and exhausting; the latter, on the contrary,
goes on without trouble, working spontaneously, so to speak, with
reminiscences. The first creates innovations, adaptations, imitates
reality and seeks to act upon it. The latter, on the contrary, turns
away from reality, sets free subjective wishes, and is, in regard to
adaptation, wholly unproductive.[29]

Let us leave aside the query as to why we possess these two different
ways of thinking, and turn back to the second proposition, namely, how
comes it that we have two different ways of thinking? I have intimated
above that history shows us that directed thinking was not always as
developed as it is at present. In this age the most beautiful expression
of directed thinking is science, and the technic fostered by it. Both
things are indebted for their existence simply to an energetic education
in directed thinking. At the time, however, when a few forerunners of
the present culture, like the poet Petrarch, first began to appreciate
Nature understandingly[30] there was already in existence an equivalent
for our science, to wit, scholasticism.[31] This took its objects from
the phantasies of the past, and it gave to the mind a dialectic training
in directed thinking. The only success which beckoned the thinker was
rhetorical victory in disputation, and not a visible transformation of
reality.

The subjects of thinking were often astonishingly phantastical; for
example, questions were discussed, such as how many angels could have a
place on the point of a needle? Whether Christ could have done his work
of redemption equally well if he had come into the world as a pea? The
possibility of such problems, to which belong the metaphysical problems
in general, viz., to be able to know the unknowable, shows us of what
peculiar kind that mind must have been which created such things which
to us are the height of absurdity. Nietzsche had guessed, however, at
the biological background of this phenomenon when he spoke of the
“beautiful tension” of the Germanic mind which the Middle Ages created.
Taken historically, scholasticism, in the spirit of which persons of
towering intellectual powers, such as Thomas of Aquinas, Duns Scotus,
Abélard, William of Occam and others, have labored, is the mother of the
modern scientific attitude, and a later time will see clearly how and in
what scholasticism still furnishes living undercurrents to the science
of to-day. Its whole nature lies in dialectic gymnastics which have
raised the symbol of speech, the word, to an almost absolute meaning, so
that it finally attained to that substantiality which expiring antiquity
could lend to its _logos_ only temporarily, through attributes of
mystical valuation. The great work of scholasticism, however, appears to
be the foundation of firmly knitted intellectual sublimation, the
_conditio sine qua non_ of the modern scientific and technical spirit.

Should we go further back into history, we shall find that which to-day
we call science, dissolved into an indistinct cloud. The modern
culture-creating mind is incessantly occupied in stripping off all
subjectivity from experience, and in finding those formulas which bring
Nature and her forces to the best and most fitting expression. It would
be an absurd and entirely unjustified self-glorification if we were to
assume that we are more energetic or more intelligent than the
ancients—our materials for knowledge have increased, but not our
intellectual capacity. For this reason, we become immediately as
obstinate and insusceptible in regard to new ideas as people in the
darkest times of antiquity. Our knowledge has increased but not our
wisdom. The main point of our interest is displaced wholly into material
reality; antiquity preferred a mode of thought which was more closely
related to a phantastic type. Except for a sensitive perspicuity towards
works of art, not attained since then, we seek in vain in antiquity for
that precise and concrete manner of thinking characteristic of modern
science. We see the antique spirit create not science but mythology.
Unfortunately, we acquire in school only a very paltry conception of the
richness and immense power of life of Grecian mythology.

Therefore, at first glance, it does not seem possible for us to assume
that that energy and interest which to-day we put into science and
technic, the man of antiquity gave in great part to his mythology. That,
nevertheless, gives the explanation for the bewildering changes, the
kaleidoscopic transformations and new syncretistic groupings, and the
continued rejuvenation of the myths in the Grecian sphere of culture.
Here, we move in a world of phantasies, which, little concerned with the
outer course of things, flows from an inner source, and, constantly
changing, creates now plastic, now shadowy shapes. This phantastical
activity of the ancient mind created artistically _par excellence_. The
object of the interest does not seem to have been to grasp hold of the
“how” of the real world as objectively and exactly as possibly, but to
æsthetically adapt subjective phantasies and expectations. There was
very little place among ancient people for the coldness and disillusion
which Giordano Bruno’s thoughts on eternity and Kepler’s discoveries
brought to modern humanity. The naïve man of antiquity saw in the sun
the great Father of the heaven and the earth, and in the moon the
fruitful good Mother. Everything had its demons; they animated equally a
human being and his brother, the animal. Everything was considered
according to its anthropomorphic or theriomorphic attributes, as human
being or animal. Even the disc of the sun was given wings or four feet,
in order to illustrate its movement. Thus arose an idea of the universe
which was not only very far from reality, but was one which corresponded
wholly to subjective phantasies.

We know, from our own experience, this state of mind. It is an infantile
stage. To a child the moon is a man or a face or a shepherd of the
stars. The clouds in the sky seem like little sheep; the dolls drink,
eat and sleep; the child places a letter at the window for the
Christ-child; he calls to the stork to bring him a little brother or
sister; the cow is the wife of the horse, and the dog the husband of the
cat. We know, too, that lower races, like the negroes, look upon the
locomotive as an animal, and call the drawers of the table the child of
the table.

As we learn through Freud, the dream shows a similar type. Since the
dream is unconcerned with the real condition of things, it brings the
most heterogeneous matter together, and a world of impossibilities takes
the place of realities. Freud finds progression characteristic of
thinking when awake; that is to say, the advancement of the thought
excitation from the system of the inner or outer perception through the
“endopsychic” work of association, conscious and unconscious, to the
motor end; that is to say, towards innervation. In the dream he finds
the reverse, namely, regression of the thought excitation from the
preconscious or unconscious to the system of perception, by the means of
which the dream receives its ordinary impression of sensuous
distinctness, which can rise to an almost hallucinating clearness. The
dream thinking moves in a retrograde manner towards the raw material of
memory. “The structure of the dream thoughts is dissolved during the
progress of regression into its raw material.” The reanimation of the
original perception is, however, only one side of regression. The other
side is regression to the infantile memory material, which might also be
understood as regression to the original perception, but which deserves
especial mention on account of its independent importance. This
regression might, indeed, be considered as “historical.” The dream,
according to this conception, might also be described as _the substitute
of the infantile scene, changed through transference into the recent
scene_.

The infantile scene cannot carry through its revival; it must be
satisfied with its return as a dream. From this conception of the
historical side of regression, it follows consequently that the modes of
conclusion of the dream, in so far as one may speak of them, must show
at the same time an analogous and infantile character. This is truly the
case, as experience has abundantly shown, so that to-day every one who
is familiar with the subject of dream analysis confirms Freud’s
proposition that _dreams are a piece of the conquered life of the
childish soul_. Inasmuch as the childish psychic life is undeniably of
an archaic type, this characteristic belongs to the dream in quite an
unusual degree. Freud calls our attention to this especially.

  “The dream, which fulfils its wishes by a short, regressive path,
  affords us only an example of the primary method of working of the
  psychic apparatus, which has been abandoned by us as unsuitable. That
  which once ruled in the waking state, when the psychical life was
  still young and impotent, appears to be banished to the dream life, in
  somewhat the same way as the bow and arrow, those discarded, primitive
  weapons of adult humanity, have been relegated to the nursery.”[32]

All this experience suggests to us that we draw a parallel between the
phantastical, mythological thinking of antiquity and the similar
thinking of children, between the lower human races and dreams.[33] This
train of thought is not a strange one for us, but quite familiar through
our knowledge of comparative anatomy and the history of development,
which show us how the structure and function of the human body are the
results of a series of embryonic changes which correspond to similar
changes in the history of the race. Therefore, the supposition is
justified that ontogenesis corresponds in psychology to phylogenesis.
Consequently, it would be true, as well, that the state of infantile
thinking in the child’s psychic life, as well as in dreams, is nothing
but a re-echo of the prehistoric and the ancient.[34]

In regard to this, Nietzsche takes a very broad and remarkable
standpoint.[35]

  “In our sleep and in our dreams we pass through the whole thought of
  earlier humanity. I mean, in the same way that man reasons in his
  dreams, he reasoned when in the waking state many thousands of years.
  The first _causa_ which occurred to his mind in reference to anything
  that needed explanation, satisfied him and passed for truth. In the
  dream this atavistic relic of humanity manifests its existence within
  us, for it is the foundation upon which the higher rational faculty
  developed, and which is still developing in every individual. The
  dream carries us back into earlier states of human culture, and
  affords us a means of understanding it better. The dream thought is so
  easy to us now, because we are so thoroughly trained to it through the
  interminable stages of evolution during which this phantastic and
  facile form of theorizing has prevailed. To a certain extent the dream
  is a restorative for the brain, which during the day is called upon to
  meet the severe demands for trained thought, made by the conditions of
  a higher civilization.

  “From these facts, we can understand how lately more acute logical
  thinking, the taking seriously of cause and effect, has been
  developed; when our functions of reason and intelligence still reach
  back involuntarily to those primitive forms of conclusion, and we live
  about half our lives in this condition.”

We have already seen that Freud, independently of Nietzsche, has reached
a similar standpoint from the basis of dream analysis. The step from
this established proposition to the perception of the myths as familiar
dream images is no longer a great one. Freud has formulated this
conclusion himself.[36]

  “The investigation of this folk-psychologic formation, myths, etc., is
  by no means finished at present. To take an example of this, however,
  it is probable that the myths correspond to the distorted residue of
  wish phantasies of whole nations, the secularized dreams of young
  humanity.”

Rank[37] understands the myths in a similar manner, as a mass dream of
the people.[38] Riklin[39] has insisted rightly upon the dream mechanism
of the fables, and Abraham[40] has done the same for the myths. He says:

  “The myth is a fragment of the infantile soul-life of the people.”

and

  “Thus the myth is a _sustained, still remaining_ fragment from the
  infantile soul-life of the people, and the dream is the myth of the
  individual.”

An unprejudiced reading of the above-mentioned authors will certainly
allay all doubts concerning the intimate connection between dream
psychology and myth psychology. The conclusion results almost from
itself, that the age which created the myths thought childishly—that is
to say, phantastically, as in our age is still done, to a very great
extent (associatively or analogically) in dreams. The beginnings of myth
formations (in the child), the taking of phantasies for realities, which
is partly in accord with the historical, may easily be discovered among
children.

One might raise the objection that the mythological inclinations of
children are implanted by education. The objection is futile. Has
humanity at all ever broken loose from the myths? Every man has eyes and
all his senses to perceive that the world is dead, cold and unending,
and he has never yet seen a God, nor brought to light the existence of
such from empirical necessity. On the contrary, there was need of a
phantastic, indestructible optimism, and one far removed from all sense
of reality, in order, for example, to discover in the shameful death of
Christ really the highest salvation and the redemption of the world.
Thus one can indeed withhold from a child the substance of earlier myths
but not take from him the need for mythology. One can say, that should
it happen that all traditions in the world were cut off with a single
blow, then with the succeeding generation, the whole mythology and
history of religion would start over again. Only a few individuals
succeed in throwing off mythology in a time of a certain intellectual
supremacy—the mass never frees itself. Explanations are of no avail;
they merely destroy a transitory form of manifestation, but not the
creating impulse.

Let us again take up our earlier train of thought.

We spoke of the ontogenetic re-echo of the phylogenetic psychology among
children, we saw that phantastic thinking is a characteristic of
antiquity, of the child, and of the lower races; but now we know also
that our modern and adult man is given over in large part to this same
phantastic thinking, which enters as soon as the directed thinking
ceases. A lessening of the interest, a slight fatigue, is sufficient to
put an end to the directed thinking, the exact psychological adaptation
to the real world, and to replace it with phantasies. We digress from
the theme and give way to our own trains of thought; if the slackening
of the attention increases, then we lose by degrees the consciousness of
the present, and the phantasy enters into possession of the field.

Here the important question obtrudes itself: How are phantasies created?
From the poets we learn much about it; from science we learn little. The
psychoanalytic method, presented to science by Freud, shed light upon
this for the first time. It showed us that there are typical cycles. The
stutterer imagines he is a great orator. The truth of this, Demosthenes,
thanks to his energy, has proven. The poor man imagines himself to be a
millionaire, the child an adult. The conquered fight out victorious
battles with the conquerer; the unfit torments or delights himself with
ambitious plans. We imagine that which we lack. The interesting question
of the “why” of all this we must here leave unanswered, while we return
to the historic problem: From what source do the phantasies draw their
materials?[41] We chose, as an example, a typical phantasy of puberty. A
child in that stage before whom the whole frightening uncertainty of the
future fate opens, puts back the uncertainty into the past, through his
phantasy, and says, “If only I were not the child of my ordinary
parents, but the child of a rich and fashionable count, and had been
merely passed over to my parents, then some day a golden coach would
come, and the count would take his child back with him to his wonderful
castle,” and so it goes on, as in Grimm’s Fairy Tales which the mother
tells to her children.[42] With a normal child, it stops with the
fugitive, quickly-passing idea which is soon covered over and forgotten.
However, at one time, and that was in the ancient world of culture, the
phantasy was an openly acknowledged institution. The heroes,—I recall
Romulus and Remus, Semiramis, Moses and many others,—have been separated
from their real parents.[43] Others are directly sons of gods, and the
noble races derive their family trees from heroes and gods. As one sees
by this example, the phantasy of modern humanity is nothing but a
re-echo of an old-folk-belief, which was very widespread originally.[44]
The ambitious phantasy chooses, among others, a form which is classic,
and which once had a true meaning. The same thing holds good in regard
to the sexual phantasy. In the preamble we have spoken of dreams of
sexual assault: the robber who breaks into the house and commits a
dangerous act. That, too, is a mythological theme, and in the
prehistoric era was certainly a reality too.[45] Wholly apart from the
fact that the capture of women was something general in the lawless
prehistoric times, it was also a subject of mythology in cultivated
epochs. I recall the capture of Proserpina, Deianira, Europa, the Sabine
women, etc. We must not forget that, even to-day, marriage customs exist
in various regions which recall the ancient custom of marriage by
capture.

The symbolism of the instrument of coitus was an inexhaustible material
for ancient phantasy. It furnished a widespread cult that was designated
phallic, the object of reverence of which was the phallus. The companion
of Dionysus was Phales, a personification of the phallus proceeding from
the phallic Herme of Dionysus. The phallic symbols were countless. Among
the Sabines, the custom existed for the bridegroom to part the bride’s
hair with a lance. The bird, the fish and the snake were phallic
symbols. In addition, there existed in enormous quantities theriomorphic
representations of the sexual instinct, in connection with which the
bull, the he-goat, the ram, the boar and the ass were frequently used.
An undercurrent to this choice of symbol was furnished by the sodomitic
inclination of humanity. When in the dream phantasy of modern man, the
feared man is replaced by an animal, there is recurring in the
ontogenetic re-echo the same thing which was openly represented by the
ancients countless times. There were he-goats which pursued nymphs,
satyrs with she-goats; in still older times in Egypt there even existed
a shrine of a goat god, which the Greeks called Pan, where the
Hierodules prostituted themselves with goats.[46] It is well known that
this worship has not died out, but continues to live as a special custom
in South Italy and Greece.[47]

To-day we feel for such a thing nothing but the deepest abhorrence, and
never would admit it still slumbered in our souls. Nevertheless, just as
truly as the idea of the sexual assault is there, so are these things
there too; which we should contemplate still more closely,—not through
moral eye-glasses, with horror, but with interest as a natural science,
since these things are venerable relics of past culture periods. We
have, even to-day, a clause in our penal code against sodomy. But that
which was once so strong as to give rise to a worship among a highly
developed people has probably not wholly disappeared from the human soul
during the course of a few generations. We may not forget that since the
symposium of Plato, in which homo-sexuality faces us on the same level
with the so-called “normal sexuality,” only eighty generations have
passed. And what are eighty generations? They shrink to an imperceptible
period of time when compared with the space of time which separates us
from the homo-Neandertalensis or Heidelbergensis. I might call to mind,
in this connection, some choice thoughts of the great historian
Guglielmo Ferrero:[48]

  “It is a very common belief that the further man is separated from the
  present by time, the more does he differ from us in his thoughts and
  feelings; that the psychology of humanity changes from century to
  century, like fashions of literature. Therefore, no sooner do we find
  in past history an institution, a custom, a law or a belief a little
  different from those with which we are familiar, than we immediately
  search for some complex meanings, which frequently resolve themselves
  into phrases of doubtful significance.

  “Indeed, man does not change so quickly; his psychology at bottom
  remains the same, and even if his culture varies much from one epoch
  to another, it does not change the functioning of his mind. The
  fundamental laws of the mind remain the same, at least during the
  short historical period of which we have knowledge, and all phenomena,
  even the most strange, must be capable of explanation by those common
  laws of the mind which we can recognize in ourselves.”

The psychologist should accept this viewpoint without reservation as
peculiarly applicable to himself. To-day, indeed, in our civilization
the phallic processions, the Dionysian mysteries of classical Athens,
the barefaced Phallic emblems, have disappeared from our coins, houses,
temples and streets; so also have the theriomorphic representations of
the Deity been reduced to small remnants, like the Dove of the Holy
Ghost, the Lamb of God and the Cock of Peter adorning our church towers.
In the same way, the capture and violation of women have shrunken away
to crimes. Yet all of this does not affect the fact that we, in
childhood, go through a period in which the impulses toward these
archaic inclinations appear again and again, and that through all our
life we possess, side by side with the newly recruited, directed and
adapted thought, a phantastic thought which corresponds to the thought
of the centuries of antiquity and barbarism. Just as our bodies still
keep the reminders of old functions and conditions in many old-fashioned
organs, so our minds, too, which apparently have outgrown those archaic
tendencies, nevertheless bear the marks of the evolution passed through,
and the very ancient re-echoes, at least dreamily, in phantasies.

The symbolism which Freud has discovered, is revealed as an expression
of a thinking and of an impulse limited to the dream, to wrong conduct,
and to derangements of the mind, which form of thinking and impulse at
one time ruled as the mightiest influence in past culture epochs.

The question of _whence_ comes the inclination and ability which enables
the mind to express itself symbolically, brings us to the distinction
between the two kinds of thinking—the directed and adapted on one hand,
and the subjective, fed by our own egotistic wishes, on the other. The
latter form of thinking, presupposing that it were not constantly
corrected by the adapted thinking, must necessarily produce an
overwhelmingly subjectively distorted idea of the world. We regard this
state of mind as infantile. It lies in our individual past, and in the
past of mankind.

With this we affirm the important fact that man in his phantastic
thinking has kept a condensation of the psychic history of his
development. An extraordinarily important task, which even to-day is
hardly possible, is to give a systematic description of phantastic
thinking. One may, at the most, sketch it. While directed thinking is a
phenomenon conscious throughout,[49] the same cannot be asserted of
phantastic thinking. Doubtless, a great part of it still falls entirely
in the realm of the conscious, but, at least, just as much goes along in
half shadows, and generally an undetermined amount in the unconscious;
and this can, therefore, be disclosed only indirectly.[50] By means of
phantastic thinking, directed thinking is connected with the oldest
foundations of the human mind, which have been for a long time beneath
the threshold of the consciousness. The products of this phantastic
thinking arising directly from the consciousness are, first, waking
dreams, or day-dreams, to which Freud, Flournoy, Pick and others have
given special attention; then the dreams which offer to the
consciousness, at first, a mysterious exterior, and win meaning only
through the indirectly inferred unconscious contents. Lastly, there is a
so-called wholly unconscious phantasy system in the split-off complex,
which exhibits a pronounced tendency towards the production of a
dissociated personality.[51]

Our foregoing explanations show wherein the products arising from the
unconscious are related to the mythical. From all these signs it may be
concluded that the soul possesses in some degree historical strata, the
oldest stratum of which would correspond to the unconscious. The result
of that must be that an introversion occurring in later life, according
to the Freudian teaching, seizes upon regressive infantile reminiscences
taken from the individual past. That first points out the way; then,
with stronger introversion and regression (strong repressions,
introversion psychoses), there come to light pronounced traits of an
archaic mental kind which, under certain circumstances, might go as far
as the re-echo of a once manifest, archaic mental product.

This problem deserves to be more thoroughly discussed. As a concrete
example, let us take the history of the pious Abbé Oegger which Anatole
France has communicated to us.[52] This priest was a hypercritical man,
and much given to phantasies, especially in regard to one question,
viz., the fate of Judas; whether he was really damned, as the teaching
of the church asserts, to everlasting punishment, or whether God had
pardoned him after all. Oegger sided with the intelligent point of view
that God, in his all-wisdom, had chosen Judas as an instrument, in order
to bring about the highest point of the work of redemption by
Christ.[53] This necessary instrument, without the help of which the
human race would not have been a sharer in salvation, could not possibly
be damned by the all-good God. In order to put an end to his doubts,
Oegger went one night to the church, and made supplication for a sign
that Judas was saved. Then he felt a heavenly touch upon his shoulder.
Following this, Oegger told the Archbishop of his resolution to go out
into the world to preach God’s unending mercy.

Here we have a richly developed phantasy system before us. It is
concerned with the subtle and perpetually undecided question as to
whether the legendary figure of Judas is damned or not. The Judas legend
is, in itself, mythical material, viz., the malicious betrayal of a
hero. I recall Siegfried and Hagen, Balder and Loki. Siegfried and
Balder were murdered by a faithless traitor from among their closest
associates. This myth is moving and tragic—it is not honorable battle
which kills the noble, but evil treachery. It is, too, an occurrence
which is historical over and over again. One thinks of Cæsar and Brutus.
Since the myth of such a deed is very old, and still the subject of
teaching and repetition, it is the expression of a psychological fact,
that envy does not allow humanity to sleep, and that all of us carry, in
a hidden recess of our heart, a deadly wish towards the hero. This rule
can be applied generally to mythical tradition. _It does not set forth
any account of the old events, but rather acts in such a way that it
always reveals a thought common to humanity, and once more rejuvenated._
Thus, for example, the lives and deeds of the founders of old religions
are the purest condensations of typical, contemporaneous myths, behind
which the individual figure entirely disappears.[54]

But why does our pious Abbé torment himself with the old Judas legend?
He first went into the world to preach the gospel of mercy, and then,
after some time, he separated from the Catholic church and became a
Swedenborgian. Now we understand his Judas phantasy. _He was the Judas_
who betrayed his Lord. Therefore, first of all, he had to make sure of
the divine mercy, in order to be Judas in peace.

This case throws a light upon the mechanism of the phantasies in
general. The known, conscious phantasy may be of mythical or other
material; it is not to be taken seriously as such, for it has an
indirect meaning. If we take it, however, as important per se, then the
thing is not understandable, and makes one despair of the efficiency of
the mind. But we saw, in the case of Abbé Oegger, that his doubts and
his hopes did not turn upon the historical problem of Judas, but upon
his own personality, which wished to win a way to freedom for itself
through the solution of the Judas problem.

_The conscious phantasies tell us of mythical or other material of
undeveloped or no longer recognized wish tendencies in the soul._ As is
easily to be understood, an innate tendency, an acknowledgment of which
one refuses to make, and which one treats as non-existent, can hardly
contain a thing that may be in accord with our conscious character. It
concerns the tendencies which are considered immoral, and as generally
impossible, and the strongest resentment is felt towards bringing them
into the consciousness. What would Oegger have said had he been told
confidentially that he was preparing himself for the Judas rôle? And
what in ourselves do we consider immoral and non-existent, or which we
at least wish were non-existent? It is that which in antiquity lay
widespread on the surface, viz., sexuality in all its various
manifestations. Therefore, we need not wonder in the least when we find
this at the base of most of our phantasies, even if the phantasies have
a different appearance. Because Oegger found the damnation of Judas
incompatible with God’s goodness, he thought about the conflict in that
way; that is the conscious sequence. Along with this is the unconscious
sequence; because Oegger himself wished to be a Judas, he first made
sure of the goodness of God. To Oegger, Judas was the symbol of his own
unconscious tendency, and he made use of this symbol in order to be able
to meditate over his unconscious wish. The direct coming into
consciousness of the Judas wish would have been too painful for him.
_Thus, there must be typical myths which are really the instruments of a
folk-psychological complex treatment._ Jacob Burckhardt seems to have
suspected this when he once said that every Greek of the classical era
carried in himself a fragment of the Oedipus, just as every German
carries a fragment of Faust.[55]

The problem which the simple story of the Abbé Oegger has brought
clearly before us confronts us again when we prepare to examine
phantasies which owe their existence this time to an exclusively
unconscious work. We are indebted for the material which we will use in
the following chapters to the useful publication of an American woman,
Miss Frank Miller, who has given to the world some poetical
unconsciously formed phantasies under the title, “Quelque faits
d’imagination créatrice subconsciente.”—_Vol. V., Archives de
Psychologie, 1906._[56]




                               CHAPTER II
                         THE MILLER PHANTASIES


We know, from much psychoanalytic experience, that whenever one recounts
his phantasies or his dreams, he deals not only with the most important
and intimate of his problems, but with the one the most painful at that
moment.[57]

Since in the case of Miss Miller we have to do with a complicated
system, we must give our attention carefully to the particulars which I
will discuss, following as best I can Miss Miller’s presentation.

In the first chapter, “Phénomènes de suggestion passagère ou
d’autosuggestion instantanée,” Miss Miller gives a list of examples of
her unusual suggestibility, which she herself considers as a symptom of
her nervous temperament; for example, she is excessively fond of caviar,
whereas some of her relatives loathe it. However, as soon as any one
expresses his loathing, she herself feels momentarily the same loathing.
I do not need to emphasize especially the fact that such examples are
very important in individual psychology; that caviar is a food for which
nervous women frequently have an especial predilection, is a fact well
known to the psychoanalyst.

Miss Miller has an extraordinary faculty for taking other people’s
feelings upon herself, and of identification; for example, she
identifies herself to such a degree in “Cyrano” with the wounded
Christian de Neuvillette, that she feels in her own breast a truly
piercing pain at that place where Christian received the deadly blow.

From the viewpoint of analytic psychology, the theatre, aside from any
esthetic value, may be considered as an institution for the treatment of
the mass complex. The enjoyment of the comedy, or of the dramatic plot
ending happily is produced by an unreserved identification of one’s own
complexes with the play. The enjoyment of tragedy lies in the thrilling
yet satisfactory feeling that something which might occur to one’s self
is happening to another. The sympathy of our author with the dying
Christian means that there is in her a complex awaiting a similar
solution, which whispers softly to her “hodie tibi, cras mihi,” and that
one may know exactly what is considered the effectual moment Miss Miller
adds that she felt a pain in her breast, “Lorsque Sarah Bernhardt se
précipite sur lui pour étancher le sang de sa blessure.” Therefore the
effectual moment is when the love between Christian and Roxane comes to
a sudden end.

If we glance over the whole of Rostand’s play, we come upon certain
moments, the effect of which one cannot easily escape and which we will
emphasize here because they have meaning for all that follows. Cyrano de
Bergerac, with the long ugly nose, on account of which he undertakes
countless duels, loves Roxane, who, for her part unaware of it, loves
Christian, because of the beautiful verses which really originate from
Cyrano’s pen, but which apparently come from Christian. Cyrano is the
misunderstood one, whose passionate love and noble soul no one suspects;
the hero who sacrifices himself for others, and, dying, just in the
evening of life, reads to her once more Christian’s last letter, the
verses which he himself had composed.

           “Roxane, adieu, je vais mourir!
           C’est pour ce soir, je crois, ma bien-aimée!
           J’ai l’âme lourde encore d’amour inexprimé.
           Et je meurs! Jamais plus, jamais mes yeux grisés,
           Mes regards dont c’était les frémissantes fêtes,
           Ne baiseront au vol les gestes que vous faites;
           J’en revois un petit qui vous est familier
           Pour toucher votre front et je voudrais crier—.
                 Et je crie:
           Adieu!—Ma chère, ma chérie,
           Mon trésor—mon amour!
           Mon coeur ne vous quitta jamais une seconde,
           Et je suis et je serai jusque dans l’autre monde
           Celui qui vous aime sans mesure, celui—”

Whereupon Roxane recognizes in him the real loved one. It is already too
late; death comes; and in agonized delirium, Cyrano raises himself, and
draws his sword:

               “Je crois, qu’elle regarde....
               Qu’elle ose regarder mon nez, la camarde!

                          (Il lève son épée.)

        Que dites-vous?... C’est inutile!
              Je le sais!
        Mais on ne se bat pas dans l’espoir du succès!
        Non! Non! C’est bien plus beau, lorsque c’est inutile!
        —Qu’est-ce que c’est que tous ceux-là?—Vous êtes mille?
        Ah! je vous reconnais, tous mes vieux ennemis!
        Le mensonge!

                    (Il frappe de son épée le vide.)

                  Tiens, tiens, ha! ha! les Compromis,
                  Les Préjugés, les Lâchetés!...

                              (Il frappe.)

               Que je pactise?
         Jamais, jamais!—Ah, te voilà, toi, la Sottise!
         —Je sais bien qu’à la fin vous me mettrez à bas;
         N’importe: je me bats! je me bats! je me bats!
         Oui, vous m’arrachez tout, le laurier et la rose!
         Arrachez! Il y a malgré vous quelque chose
         Que j’emporte, et ce soir, quand j’entrerai chez Dieu,
         Mon salut balaiera largement le seuil bleu.
         Quelque chose que sans un pli, sans une tache,
         J’emporte malgré vous, et c’est—mon panache.”

Cyrano, who under the hateful exterior of his body hid a soul so much
more beautiful, is a yearner and one misunderstood, and his last triumph
is that he departs, at least, with a clean shield—“Sans un pli et sans
une tache.” The identification of the author with the dying Christian,
who in himself is a figure but little impressive and sympathetic,
expresses clearly that a sudden end is destined for her love just as for
Christian’s love. The tragic intermezzo with Christian, however, is
played as we have seen upon a background of much wider significance,
viz., the misunderstood love of Cyrano for Roxane. Therefore, the
identification with Christian has only the significance of a substitute
memory (“deckerinnerung”), and is really intended for Cyrano. That this
is just what we might expect will be seen in the further course of our
analysis.

Besides this story of identification with Christian, there follows as a
further example an extraordinarily plastic memory of the sea, evoked by
the sight of a photograph of a steamboat on the high seas. (“Je sentis
les pulsations des machines, le soulèvement des vagues, le balancement
du navire.”)

We may mention here the supposition that there are connected with sea
journeys particularly impressive and strong memories which penetrate
deeply into the soul and give an especially strong character to the
surface memories through unconscious harmony. To what extent the
memories assumed here agree with the above mentioned problem we shall
see in the following pages.

This example, following at this time, is singular: Once, while in
bathing, Miss Miller wound a towel around her hair, in order to protect
it from a wetting. At the same moment she had the following strong
impression:

  “Il me sembla que j’étais sur un piédestal, une véritable statue
  égyptienne, avec tous ses détails: membres raides, un pied en avant,
  la main tenant des insignes,” and so on.

Miss Miller identified herself, therefore, with an Egyptian statue, and
naturally the foundation for this was a subjective pretension. That is
to say, “I am like an Egyptian statue, just as stiff, wooden, sublime
and impassive,” qualities for which the Egyptian statue is proverbial.
One does not make such an assertion to one’s self without an inner
compulsion, and the correct formula might just as well be, “as stiff,
wooden, etc., as an Egyptian statue I might indeed be.” The sight of
one’s own unclothed body in a bath has undeniable effects for the
phantasy, which can be set at rest by the above formula.[58]

The example which follows this, emphasizes the author’s personal
influence upon an artist:

  “J’ai réussi à lui faire rendre des paysages, comme ceux du lac Léman,
  où il n’a jamais été, et il prétendait que je pouvais lui faire rendre
  des choses qu’il n’avait jamais vues, et lui donner la sensation d’une
  atmosphère ambiante qu’il n’avait jamais sentie; bref que je me
  servais de lui comme lui-même se servait de son crayon, c’est à dire
  comme d’un simple instrument.”

This observation stands in abrupt contrast to the phantasy of the
Egyptian statue. Miss Miller had here the unspoken need of emphasizing
her almost magic effect upon another person. This could not have
happened, either, without an unconscious need, which is particularly
felt by one who does not often succeed in making an emotional impression
upon a fellow being.

With that, the list of examples which are to picture Miss Miller’s
autosuggestibility and suggestive effect, is exhausted. In this respect,
the examples are neither especially striking nor interesting. From an
analytical viewpoint, on the contrary, they are much more important,
since they afford us a glance into the soul of the writer. Ferenczi[59]
has taught us in an excellent work what is to be thought about
suggestibility, that is to say, that these phenomena win new aspects in
the light of the Freudian libido theory, in so much as their effects
become clear through “Libido-besetzungen.” This was already indicated
above in the discussion of the examples, and in the greatest detail
regarding the identification with Christian. The identification becomes
effective by its receiving an influx of energy from the strongly
accentuated thought and emotional feeling underlying the Christian
motif. Just the reverse is the suggestive effect of the individual in an
especial capacity for concentrating interest (that is to say, libido)
upon another person, by which the other is unconsciously compelled to
reaction (the same or opposed). The majority of the examples concern
cases where Miss Miller is put under the effects of suggestion; that is
to say, when the libido has spontaneously gained possession of certain
impressions, and this is impossible if the libido is dammed up to an
unusual degree by the lack of application to reality. Miss Miller’s
observations about suggestibility inform us, therefore, of the fact that
the author is pleased to tell us in her following phantasies something
of the history of her love.




                              CHAPTER III
                          THE HYMN OF CREATION


The second chapter in Miss Miller’s work is entitled, “Gloire à Dieu.
Poème onirique.”

When twenty years of age, Miss Miller took a long journey through
Europe. We leave the description of it to her:

  “After a long and rough journey from New York to Stockholm, from there
  to Petersburg and Odessa, I found it a true pleasure[60] to leave the
  world of inhabited cities—and to enter the world of waves, sky and
  silence—I stayed hours long on deck to dream, stretched out in a
  reclining chair. The histories, legends and myths of the different
  countries which I saw in the distance, came back to me indistinctly
  blended together in a sort of luminous mist, in which things lost
  their reality, while the dreams and thoughts alone took on somewhat
  the appearance of reality. At first, I even avoided all company and
  kept to myself, lost wholly in my dreams, where all that I knew of
  great, beautiful and good came back into my consciousness with new
  strength and new life. I also employed a great part of my time writing
  to my distant friends, reading and sketching out short poems about the
  regions visited. Some of these poems were of a very serious
  character.”

It may seem superfluous, perhaps, to enter intimately into all these
details. If we recall, however, the remark made above,—that when people
let their unconscious speak, they always tell us the most important
things of their intimate selves—then even the smallest detail appears to
have meaning. Valuable personalities invariably tell us, through their
unconscious, things that are generally valuable, so that patient
interest is rewarded.

Miss Miller describes here a state of “introversion.” After the life of
the cities with their many impressions had been absorbing her interest
(with that already discussed strength of suggestion which powerfully
enforced the impression) she breathed freely upon the ocean, and after
so many external impressions, became engrossed wholly in the internal
with intentional abstraction from the surroundings, so that things lost
their reality and dreams became truth. We know from psychopathology that
certain mental disturbances[61] exist which are first manifested by the
individuals shutting themselves off slowly, more and more, from reality
and sinking into their phantasies, during which process, in proportion
as the reality loses its hold, the inner world gains in reality and
determining power.[62] This process leads to a certain point (which
varies with the individual) when the patients suddenly become more or
less conscious of their separation from reality. The event which then
enters is the pathological excitation: that is to say, the patients
begin to turn towards the environment, with diseased views (to be sure)
which, however, still represent the compensating, although unsuccessful,
attempt at transference.[63] The methods of reaction are, naturally,
very different. I will not concern myself more closely about this here.

This type appears to be generally a psychological rule which holds good
for all neuroses and, therefore, also for the normal in a much less
degree. We might, therefore, expect that Miss Miller, after this
energetic and persevering introversion, which had even encroached for a
time upon the feeling of reality, would succumb anew to an impression of
the real world and also to just as suggestive and energetic an influence
as that of her dreams. Let us proceed with the narrative:

  “But as the journey drew to an end, the ship’s officers outdid
  themselves in kindness (tout ce qu’il y a de plus empressé et de plus
  aimable) and I passed many amusing hours teaching them English. On the
  Sicilian coast, in the harbor of Catania, I wrote a sailor’s song
  which was very similar to a song well known on the sea, (Brine, wine
  and damsels fine). The Italians in general all sing very well, and one
  of the officers who sang on deck during night watch, had made a great
  impression upon me and had given me the idea of writing some words
  adapted to his melody. Soon after that, I was very nearly obliged to
  reverse the well-known saying, ‘Veder Napoli e poi morir,’—that is to
  say, suddenly I became very ill, although not dangerously so. I
  recovered to such an extent, however, that I could go on land to visit
  the sights of the city in a carriage. This day tired me very much, and
  since we had planned to see Pisa the following day, I went on board
  early in the evening and soon lay down to sleep without thinking of
  anything more serious than the beauty of the officers and the ugliness
  of the Italian beggars.”

One is somewhat disappointed at meeting here, instead of the expected
impression of reality, rather a small intermezzo, a flirtation.
Nevertheless, one of the officers, the singer, had made a great
impression (il m’avait fait beaucoup d’impression). The remark at the
close of the description, “sans songer à rien de plus sérieux qu’à la
beauté des officiers,” and so on, diminishes the seriousness of the
impression, it is true. The assumption, however, that the impression
openly influenced the mood very much, is supported by the fact that a
poem upon a subject of such an erotic character came forth immediately,
“Brine, wine and damsels fine,” and in the singer’s honor. One is only
too easily inclined to take such an impression lightly, and one admits
so gladly the statements of the participators when they represent
everything as simple and not at all serious. I dwell upon this
impression at length, because it is important to know that an erotic
impression after such an introversion, has a deep effect and is
undervalued, possibly, by Miss Miller. The suddenly passing sickness is
obscure and needs a psychologic interpretation which cannot be touched
upon here because of lack of data. The phenomena now to be described can
only be explained as arising from a disturbance which reaches to the
very depths of her being.

  “From Naples to Livorno, the ship travelled for a night, during which
  I slept more or less well,—my sleep, however, is seldom deep or
  dreamless. It seemed to me as if my mother’s voice wakened me, just at
  the end of the following dream. At first I had a vague conception of
  the words, ‘When the morning stars sang together,’ which were the
  praeludium of a certain confused representation of creation and of the
  mighty chorals resounding through the universe. In spite of the
  strange, contradictory and confused character which is peculiar to the
  dream, there was mingled in it the chorus of an oratorio which has
  been given by one of the foremost musical societies of New York, and
  with that were also memories of Milton’s ‘Paradise Lost.’ Then from
  out of this whirl, there slowly emerged certain words, which arranged
  themselves into three strophes and, indeed, they seemed to be in my
  own handwriting on ordinary blue-lined writing paper on a page of my
  old poetry book which I always carried around with me; in short, they
  appeared to me exactly as some minutes later they were in reality in
  my book.”

Miss Miller now wrote down the following poem, which she rearranged
somewhat a few months later, to make it more nearly, in her opinion,
like the dream original.

              “When the Eternal first made Sound
              A myriad ears sprang out to hear,
              And throughout all the Universe
              There rolled an echo deep and clear:
              All glory to the God of Sound!

              “When the Eternal first made Light
              A myriad eyes sprang out to look,
              And hearing ears and seeing eyes
              Once more a mighty choral took:
              All glory to the God of Light!

              “When the Eternal first gave Love
              A myriad hearts sprang into life;
              Ears filled with music, eyes with light;
              Pealed forth with hearts with love all rife:
              All glory to the God of Love!”

Before we enter upon Miss Miller’s attempt to bring to light through her
suppositions[64] the root of this subliminal creation, we will attempt a
short analytic survey of the material already in our possession. The
impression on the ship has already been properly emphasized, so that we
need have no further difficulty in gaining possession of the dynamic
process which brought about this poetical revelation. It was made clear
in the preceding paragraphs that Miss Miller possibly had not
inconsiderably undervalued the importance of the erotic impression. This
assumption gains in probability through experience, which shows that,
very generally, relatively weak erotic impressions are greatly
undervalued. One can see this best in cases where those concerned,
either from social or moral grounds, consider an erotic relation as
something quite impossible; for example, parents and children, brothers
and sisters, relations (homosexual) between older and younger men, and
so on. If the impression is relatively slight, then it does not exist at
all for the participators; if the impression is strong, then a tragic
dependence arises, which may result in some great nonsense, or be
carried to any extent. This lack of understanding can go unbelievably
far; mothers, who see the first erections of the small son in their own
bed, a sister who half-playfully embraces her brother, a twenty-year-old
daughter who still seats herself on her father’s lap, and then has
“strange” sensations in her “abdomen.” They are all morally indignant to
the highest degree if one speaks of “sexuality.” Finally, our whole
education is carried on with the tacit agreement to know as little as
possible of the erotic, and to spread abroad the deepest ignorance in
regard to it. It is no wonder, therefore, that the judgment, _in
puncto_, of the importance of an erotic impression is generally unsafe
and inadequate.

Miss Miller was under the influence of a deep erotic impression, as we
have seen. Because of the sum-total of the feelings aroused by this, it
does not seem that this impression was more than dimly realized, for the
dream had to contain a powerful repetition. From analytic experience,
one knows that the early dreams which patients bring for analysis are
none the less of especial interest, because of the fact that they bring
out criticisms and valuations of the physician’s personality, which
previously, would have been asked for directly in vain. They enrich the
conscious impression which the patient had of his physician, and often
concerning very important points. They are naturally erotic observations
which the unconscious was forced to make, just because of the quite
universal undervaluation and uncertain judgment of the relatively weak
erotic impression. In the drastic and hyperbolic manner of expression of
the dream, the impression often appears in almost unintelligible form on
account of the immeasurable dimension of the symbol. A further
peculiarity which seems to rest upon the historic strata of the
unconscious, is this—that an erotic impression, to which conscious
acknowledgment is denied, usurps an earlier and discarded transference
and expresses itself in that. Therefore, it frequently happens, for
example, that among young girls at the time of their first love,
remarkable difficulties develop in the capacity for erotic expression,
which may be reduced analytically to disturbances through a regressive
attempt at resuscitation of the father image, or the “Father-Imago.”[65]

Indeed, one might presume something similar in Miss Miller’s case, for
the idea of the masculine creative deity is a derivation, analytically
and historically psychologic, of the “Father-Imago,”[66] and aims, above
all, to replace the discarded infantile father transference in such a
way that for the individual the passing from the narrow circle of the
family into the wider circle of human society may be simpler or made
easier.

In the light of this reflection, we can see, in the poem and its
“Praeludium,” the religious, poetically formed product of an
introversion depending upon the surrogate of the “Father-Imago.” In
spite of the incomplete apperception of the effectual impression,
essential component parts of this are included in the idea of
compensation, as marks, so to speak, of its origin. (Pfister has coined
for this the striking expression, “Law of the Return of the Complex.”)
The effectual impression was that of the officer singing in the night
watch, “When the morning stars sang together.” The idea of this opened a
new world to the girl. (Creation.)

This creator has created tone, then light, and then love. That the first
to be created should have been tone, can be made clear only
individually, for there is no cosmogony except the Gnosis of Hermes, a
generally quite unknown system, which would have such tendencies. But
now we might venture a conjecture, which is already apparent, and which
soon will be proven thoroughly, viz., the following chain of
associations: the singer—the singing morning stars—the God of tone—the
Creator—the God of Light—(of the sun)—(of the fire)—and of Love.

The links of this chain are proven by the material, with the exception
of sun and fire, which I put in parentheses, but which, however, will be
proven through what follows in the further course of the analysis. All
of these expressions, with one exception, belong to erotic speech. (“My
God, star, light; my sun, fire of love, fiery love,” etc.) “Creator”
appears indistinct at first, but becomes understandable through the
reference to the undertone of Eros, to the vibrating chord of Nature,
which attempts to renew itself in every pair of lovers, and awaits the
wonder of creation.

Miss Miller had taken pains to disclose the unconscious creation of her
mind to her understanding, and, indeed through a procedure which agrees
in principle with psychoanalysis, and, therefore, leads to the same
results as psychoanalysis. But, as usually happens with laymen and
beginners, Miss Miller, because she had no knowledge of psychoanalysis,
left off at the thoughts which necessarily bring the deep complex lying
at the bottom of it to light in an indirect, that is to say, censored
manner. More than this, a simple method, merely the carrying out of the
thought to its conclusion, is sufficient to discover the meaning. Miss
Miller finds it astonishing that her unconscious phantasy does not,
following the Mosaic account of creation, put light in the first place,
instead of tone.

Now follows an explanation, theoretically constructed and correct ad
hoc, the hollowness of which is, however, characteristic of all similar
attempts at explanation. She says:

  “It is perhaps interesting to recall that Anaxagoras also had the
  Cosmos arise out of chaos through a sort of whirlwind, which does not
  happen usually without producing sound.[67] But at this time I had
  studied no philosophy, and knew nothing either of Anaxagoras or of his
  theories about the ‘νοῦς,’ which I, unconsciously, was openly
  following. At that time, also, I was equally in complete ignorance of
  Leibnitz, and, therefore, knew nothing of his doctrine ‘dum Deus
  calculat, fit mundus.’”

Miss Miller’s references to Anaxagoras and to Leibnitz both refer to
creation by means of thought; that is to say, that divine thought alone
could bring forth a new material reality, a reference at first not
intelligible, but which will soon, however, be more easily understood.

We now come to those fancies from which Miss Miller principally drew her
unconscious creation.

  “In the first place, there is the ‘Paradise Lost’ by Milton, which we
  had at home in the edition illustrated by Doré, and which had often
  delighted me from childhood. Then the ‘Book of Job,’ which had been
  read aloud to me since the time of my earliest recollection. Moreover,
  if one compares the first words of ‘Paradise Lost’ with my first
  verse, one notices that there is the same verse measure.

                    “‘Of man’s first disobedience ...

                  “‘When the Eternal first made sound.’

  “My poem also recalls various passages in Job, and one or two places
  in Handel’s Oratorio ‘The Creation,’ which came out very indistinctly
  in the first part of the dream.”[68]

The “Lost Paradise” which, as is well known, is so closely connected
with the beginning of the world, is made more clearly evident by the
verse—

  “Of man’s first disobedience”

which is concerned evidently with the fall, the meaning of which need
not be shown any further. I know the objection which every one
unacquainted with psychoanalysis will raise, viz., that Miss Miller
might just as well have chosen any other verse as an example, and that,
accidentally, she had taken the first one that happened to appear which
had this content, also accidentally. As is well known, the criticism
which we hear equally from our medical colleagues, and from our
patients, is generally based on such arguments. This misunderstanding
arises from the fact that the law of causation in the psychical sphere
is not taken seriously enough; that is to say, there are no accidents,
no “just as wells.” It is so, and there is, therefore, a sufficient
reason at hand why it is so. It is moreover true that Miss Miller’s poem
is connected with the fall, wherein just that erotic component comes
forth, the existence of which we have surmised above.

Miss Miller neglects to tell which passages in Job occurred to her mind.
These, unfortunately, are therefore only general suppositions. Take
first, the analogy to the Lost Paradise. Job lost all that he had, and
this was due to an act of Satan, who wished to incite him against God.
In the same way mankind, through the temptation of the serpent, lost
Paradise, and was plunged into earth’s torments. The idea, or rather the
mood which is expressed by the reference to the Lost Paradise, is Miss
Miller’s feeling that she had lost something which was connected with
satanic temptation. To her it happened, just as to Job, that she
suffered innocently, for she did not fall a victim to temptation. Job’s
sufferings are not understood by his friends;[69] no one knows that
Satan has taken a hand in the game, and that Job is truly innocent. Job
never tires of avowing his innocence. Is there a hint in that? We know
that certain neurotic and especially mentally diseased people
continually defend their innocence against non-existent attacks;
however, one discovers at a closer examination that the patient, while
he apparently defends his innocence without reason, fulfils with that a
“Deckhandlung,” the energy for which arises from just those impulses,
whose sinful character is revealed by the contents of the pretended
reproach and calumny.[70]

Job suffered doubly, on one side through the loss of his fortune, on the
other through the lack of understanding in his friends; the latter can
be seen throughout the book. The suffering of the misunderstood recalls
the figure of Cyrano de Bergerac—he too suffered doubly, on one side
through hopeless love, on the other side through misunderstanding. He
falls, as we have seen, in the last hopeless battle against “Le
Mensonge, les Compromis, les Préjugés, les Lâchetés et la Sottise.—Oui,
Vous m’arrachez tout le laurier et la rose!”

Job laments

      “God delivereth me to the ungodly,
      And casteth me into the hands of the wicked,
      I was at ease, and he brake me asunder;
      Yea, he hath taken me by the neck, and dashed me to pieces:

      “_He hath also set me up for his mark.
      His archers compass me round about_;
      He cleaveth my reins asunder, and doth not spare;
      He poureth out my gall upon the ground.
      He breaketh me with breach upon breach;
      He runneth upon me like a giant.”—_Job_ xvi: 11–15.

The analogy of feeling lies in the suffering of the hopeless struggle
against the more powerful. It is as if this conflict were accompanied
from afar by the sounds of “creation,” which brings up a beautiful and
mysterious image belonging to the unconscious, and which has not yet
forced its way up to the light of the upper world. We surmise, rather
than know, that this battle has really something to do with creation,
with the struggles between negations and affirmations. The references to
Rostand’s “Cyrano” through the identification with Christian, to
Milton’s “Paradise Lost,” to the sorrows of Job, misunderstood by his
friends, betray plainly that in the soul of the poet something was
identified with these ideas. She also has suffered like Cyrano and Job,
has lost paradise, and dreams of “creation,”—creation by means of
thought—fruition through the whirlwind of Anaxagoras.[71]

We once more submit ourselves to Miss Miller’s guidance:

  “I remember that when fifteen years old, I was once very much stirred
  up over an article, read aloud to me by my mother, concerning the idea
  which spontaneously produced its object. I was so excited that I could
  not sleep all night because of thinking over and over again what that
  could mean.

  “From the age of nine to sixteen, I went every Sunday to a
  Presbyterian Church, in charge of which, at that time, was a very
  cultured minister. In one of the earliest memories which I have
  retained of him, I see myself as a very small girl sitting in a very
  large pew, continually endeavoring to keep myself awake and pay
  attention, without in the least being able to understand what he meant
  when he spoke to us of Chaos, Cosmos and the Gift of Love (don
  d’amour).”

There are also rather early memories of the awakening of puberty (nine
to sixteen) which have connected the idea of the cosmos springing from
chaos with the “don d’amour.” The medium in which these associations
occur is the memory of a certain very much honored ecclesiastic who
spoke those dark words. From the same period of time comes the
remembrance of that excitement about the idea of the “creative thought”
which from itself “produced its object.” Here are two ways of creation
intimated: the creative thought, and the mysterious reference to the
“don d’amour.”

At the time when I had not yet understood the nature of psychoanalysis,
I had a fortunate opportunity of winning through continual observation a
deep insight into the soul of a fifteen-year-old girl. Then I
discovered, with astonishment, what the contents of the unconscious
phantasies are, and how far removed they are from those which a girl of
that age shows outwardly. There are wide-reaching phantasies of truly
mythical fruitfulness. The girl was, in the split-off phantasy, the
race-mother of uncounted peoples.[72] If we deduct the poetically spoken
phantasy of the girl, elements are left which at that age are common to
all girls, for the unconscious content is to an infinitely greater
degree common to all mankind than the content of the individual
consciousness. For it is the condensation of that which is historically
the average and ordinary.

Miss Miller’s problem at this age was the common human problem: “How am
I to be creative?” Nature knows but one answer to that: “Through the
child (don d’amour!).” “But how is the child attained?” Here the
terrifying problem emerges, which, as our analytic experience shows, is
connected with the father,[73] where it cannot be solved; because the
original sin of incest weighs heavily for all time upon the human race.
The strong and natural love which binds the child to the father, turns
away in those years during which the humanity of the father would be all
too plainly recognized, to the higher forms of the father, to the
“Fathers” of the church, and to the Father God,[74] visibly represented
by them, and in that there lies still less possibility of solving the
problem. However, mythology is not lacking in consolations. Has not the
_logos_ become flesh too? Has not the divine _pneuma_, even the _logos_,
entered the Virgin’s womb and lived among us as the son of man? That
whirlwind of Anaxagoras was precisely the divine νοῦς which from out of
itself has become the world. Why do we cherish the image of the Virgin
Mother even to this day? Because it is always comforting and says
without speech or noisy sermon to the one seeking comfort, “I too have
become a mother,”—through the “idea which spontaneously produces its
object.”

I believe that there is foundation enough at hand for a sleepless night,
if those phantasies peculiar to the age of puberty were to become
possessed of this idea—the results would be immeasurable! All that is
psychologic has an under and an over meaning, as is expressed in the
profound remark of the old mystic: οὐρανὸς ἄνο, οὐρανὸς κάτο, αἰθέρα
ἄνο, αἰθέρα κάτο, πᾶν τοῦτο ἄνο, πᾶν τοῦτο κάτο, τοῦτο λαβὲ καὶ
εὐτυχει[75]—

We would show but slight justice, however, to the intellectual
originality of our author, if we were satisfied to trace back the
commotion of that sleepless night absolutely and entirely to the sexual
problem in a narrow sense. That would be but one-half, and truly, to
make use of the mystic’s expression, only the under half. The other half
is the intellectual sublimation, which strives to make true in its own
way the ambiguous expression of “the idea which produces its object
spontaneously,”—_ideal creation in place of the real_.

In such an intellectual accomplishment of an evidently very capable
personality, the prospect of a spiritual fruitfulness is something which
is worthy of the highest aspiration, since for many it will become a
necessity of life. Also this side of the phantasy explains, to a great
extent, the excitement, for it is a thought with a presentiment of the
future; one of those thoughts which arise, to use one of Maeterlinck’s
expressions,[76] from the “inconscient supérieur,” that “prospective
potency” of subliminal combinations.[77]

I have had the opportunity of observing certain cases of neuroses of
years’ duration, in which, at the time of the beginning of the illness
or shortly before, a dream occurred, often of visionary clarity. This
impressed itself inextinguishably upon the memory, and in analysis
revealed a hidden meaning to the patient which anticipated the
subsequent events of life; that is to say, their psychologic
meaning.[78] I am inclined to grant this meaning to the commotion of
that restless night, because the resulting events of life, in so far as
Miss Miller consciously and unconsciously unveils them to us, are
entirely of a nature to confirm the supposition that that moment is to
be considered as the inception and presentiment of a sublimated aim in
life.

Miss Miller concludes the list of her fancies with the following
remarks:

  “The dream seemed to me to come from a mixture of the representation
  of ‘Paradise Lost,’ ‘Job,’ and ‘Creation,’ with ideas such as ‘thought
  which spontaneously produces its object’: ‘the gift of love,’ ‘chaos,
  and cosmos.’”

In the same way as colored splinters of glass are combined in a
kaleidoscope, in her mind fragments of philosophy, æsthetics and
religion would seem to be combined—

  “under the stimulating influence of the journey, and the countries
  hurriedly seen, combined with the great silence and the indescribable
  charm of the sea. ‘Ce ne fut que cela et rien de plus.’ ‘Only this,
  and nothing more!’”

With these words, Miss Miller shows us out, politely and energetically.
Her parting words in her negation, confirmed over again in English,
leave behind a curiosity; viz., what position is to be negated by these
words? “Ce ne fut que cela et rien de plus”—that is to say, really, only
“le charme impalpable de la mer”—and the young man who sang melodiously
during the night watch is long since forgotten, and no one is to know,
least of all the dreamer, that he was a morning star, who came before
the creation of a new day.[79] One should take care lest he satisfy
himself and the reader with a sentence such as “ce ne fut que cela.”
Otherwise, it might immediately happen that one would become disturbed
again. This occurs to Miss Miller too, since she allowed an English
quotation to follow,—“Only this, and nothing more,” without giving the
source, it is true. The quotation comes from an unusually effective
poem, “The Raven” by Poe. The line referred to occurs in the following:

     “While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping
     As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door—
     ‘’Tis some visitor.’ I muttered, ‘tapping at my chamber door’—
                         Only this, and nothing more.”

The spectral raven knocks nightly at his door and reminds the poet of
his irrevocably lost “Lenore.” The raven’s name is “Nevermore,” and as a
refrain to every verse he croaks his horrible “Nevermore.” Old memories
come back tormentingly, and the spectre repeats inexorably “Nevermore.”
The poet seeks in vain to frighten away the dismal guest; he calls to
the raven:

 “‘Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend,’ I shrieked,
    upstarting—
 ‘Get thee back into the tempest and the night’s Plutonian shore!
 Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
 Leave my loneliness unbroken, quit the bust above my door!
 Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!’
                     Quoth the raven, ‘Nevermore.’”

That quotation, which, apparently, skips lightly over the situation,
“Only this, and nothing more,” comes from a text which depicts in an
affecting manner the despair over the lost Lenore. That quotation also
misleads our poet in the most striking manner. Therefore, she
undervalues the erotic impression and the wide-reaching effect of the
commotion caused by it. It is this undervaluation, which Freud has
formulated more precisely as “repression,” which is the reason why the
erotic problem does not attain directly conscious treatment, and from
this there arise “these psychologic riddles.” The erotic impression
works in the unconscious, and, in its stead, pushes symbols forth into
consciousness. Thus, one plays hide-and-seek with one’s self. First, it
is “the morning stars which sing together”; then “Paradise Lost”; then
the erotic yearning clothes itself in an ecclesiastical dress and utters
dark words about “World Creation” and finally rises into a religious
hymn to find there, at last, a way out into freedom, a way against which
the censor of the moral personality can oppose nothing more. The hymn
contains in its own peculiar character the marks of its origin. It thus
has fulfilled itself—the “Law of the Return of the Complex.” The night
singer, in this circuitous manner of the old transference to the
Father-Priest, has become the “Eternal,” the “Creator,” the _God of
Tone, of Light, of Love_.

The indirect course of the libido seems to be a way of sorrow; at least
“Paradise Lost” and the parallel reference to Job lead one to that
conclusion. If we take, in addition to this, the introductory intimation
of the identification with Christian, which we see concludes with
Cyrano, then we are furnished with material which pictures the indirect
course of the libido as truly a way of sorrow. It is the same as when
mankind, after the sinful fall, had the burden of the earthly life to
bear, or like the tortures of Job, who suffered under the power of Satan
and of God, and who himself, without suspecting it, became a plaything
of the superhuman forces which we no longer consider as metaphysical,
but as metapsychological. Faust also offers us the same exhibition of
God’s wager.

  _Mephistopheles_:

          What will you bet? There’s still a chance to gain him
          If unto me full leave you give
          Gently upon my road to train him!

  _Satan_:

  But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he will
  curse thee to thy face.—_Job_ i: 11.

While in Job the two great tendencies are characterized simply as good
and bad, the problem in Faust is a pronouncedly erotic one; viz., the
battle between sublimation and eros, in which the Devil is strikingly
characterized through the fitting rôle of the erotic tempter. The erotic
is lacking in Job; at the same time Job is not conscious of the conflict
within his own soul; he even continuously disputes the arguments of his
friends who wish to convince him of evil in his own heart. To this
extent, one might say that Faust is considerably more honorable since he
openly confesses to the torments of his soul.

Miss Miller acts like Job; she says nothing, and lets the evil and the
good come from the other world, from the metapsychologic. Therefore, the
identification with Job is also significant in this respect. A wider,
and, indeed, a very important analogy remains to be mentioned. The
creative power, which love really is, rightly considered from the
natural standpoint, remains as the real attribute of the Divinity,
sublimated from the erotic impression; therefore, in the poem God is
praised throughout as Creator.

Job offers the same illustration. Satan is the destroyer of Job’s
fruitfulness. God is the fruitful one himself, therefore, at the end of
the book, he gives forth, as an expression of his own creative power,
this hymn, filled with lofty poetic beauty. In this hymn, strangely
enough, two unsympathetic representatives of the animal kingdom,
behemoth and the leviathan, both expressive of the crudest force
conceivable in nature, are given chief consideration; the behemoth being
really the phallic attribute of the God of Creation.

      “Behold now behemoth, which I made as well as thee;
      He eateth grass as an ox.
      Lo, now; his strength is in his loins,
      And his force is in the muscles of his belly.
      He moveth his tail like a cedar:
      The sinews of his thighs are knit together.
      His bones are as tubes of brass;
      His limbs are like bars of iron.
      He is the chief of the ways of God:
      He only that made him giveth him his sword....
      Behold, if a river overflow, he trembleth not;
      He is confident though a Jordan swell even to his mouth.
      Shall any take him when he is on the watch.
      Or pierce through his nose with a snare?
      Canst thou draw leviathan with a fish-hook?
      Or press down his tongue with a cord?...
      Lay thy hand upon him;
      Remember the battle and do no more.
      None is so fierce that dare stir him up:
      Who then is he that can stand before me?
      Who hath first given unto me, that I should repay him?
      Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine.”
                        —_Job_ xl: 15–20, 23–24; xli: 1, 8, 10–11.

God says this in order to bring his power and omnipotence impressively
before Job’s eyes. God is like the behemoth and the leviathan; the
fruitful nature giving forth abundance,—the untamable wildness and
boundlessness of nature,—and the overwhelming danger of the unchained
power.[80]

But what has destroyed Job’s earthly paradise? The unchained power of
nature. As the poet lets it be seen here, God has simply turned his
other side outwards for once; the side which man calls the devil, and
which lets loose all the torments of nature on Job, naturally for the
purpose of discipline and training. The God who created such
monstrosities, before whom the poor weak man stiffens with anxiety,
truly must hide qualities within himself which are food for thought.
This God lives in the heart, in the unconscious, in the realm of
metapsychology. There is the source of the anxiety before the
unspeakably horrible, and of the strength to withstand the horrors. The
person, that is to say his conscious “I,” is like a plaything, like a
feather which is whirled around by different currents of air; sometimes
the sacrifice and sometimes the sacrificer, and he cannot hinder either.
The Book of Job shows us God at work both as creator and destroyer. Who
is this God? A thought which humanity in every part of the world and in
all ages has brought forth from itself and always again anew in similar
forms; a power in the other world to which man gives praise, a power
which creates as well as destroys, an idea necessary to life. Since,
psychologically understood, the divinity is nothing else than a
projected complex of representation which is accentuated in feeling
according to the degree of religiousness of the individual, so God is to
be considered as the representative of a certain sum of energy (libido).
This energy, therefore, appears projected (metaphysically) because it
works from the unconscious outwards, when it is dislodged from there, as
psychoanalysis shows. As I have earlier made apparent in the “Bedeutung
des Vaters,” the religious instinct feeds upon the incestuous libido of
the infantile period. In the principal forms of religion which now
exist, the father transference seems to be at least the moulding
influence; in older religions, it seems to be the influence of the
mother transference which creates the attributes of the divinity. The
attributes of the divinity are omnipotence, a sternly persecuting
paternalism ruling through fear (Old Testament) and a loving paternalism
(New Testament). These are the attributes of the libido in that wide
sense in which Freud has conceived this idea empirically. In certain
pagan and also in certain Christian attributes of divinity the maternal
stands out strongly, and in the former the animal also comes into the
greatest prominence.[81] Likewise, the infantile, so closely interwoven
with religious phantasies, and from time to time breaking forth so
violently, is nowhere lacking.[82] All this points to the sources of the
dynamic states of religious activity. These are those impulses which in
childhood are withdrawn from incestuous application through the
intervention of the incest barrier and which, especially at the time of
puberty, as a result of affluxes of libido coming from the still
incompletely employed sexuality, are aroused to their own peculiar
activity. As is easily understood, that which is valuable in the
God-creating idea is not the form but the power, the libido. The
primitive power which Job’s Hymn of Creation vindicates, the
unconditional and inexorable, the unjust and the superhuman, are truly
and rightly attributes of libido, which “lead us unto life,” which “let
the poor be guilty,” and against which struggle is in vain. Nothing
remains for mankind but to work in harmony with this will. Nietzsche’s
“Zarathustra” teaches us this impressively.

We see that in Miss Miller the religious hymn arising from the
unconscious is the compensating amend for the erotic; it takes a great
part of its materials from the infantile reminiscences which she
reawakened into life by the introversion of the libido. Had this
religious creation not succeeded (and also had another sublimated
application been eliminated) then Miss Miller would have yielded to the
erotic impression, either to its natural consequence or to a negative
issue, which would have replaced the lost success in love by a
correspondingly strong sorrow. It is well known that opinions are much
divided concerning the worth of this issue of an erotic conflict, such
as Miss Miller has presented to us. It is thought to be much more
beautiful to solve unnoticed an erotic tension, in the elevated feelings
of religious poetry, in which perhaps many other people can find joy and
consolation. One is wrong to storm against this conception from the
radical standpoint of fanaticism for truth.

I think that one should view with philosophic admiration the strange
paths of the libido and should investigate the purposes of its
circuitous ways.

It is not too much to say that we have herewith dug up the erotic root,
and yet the problem remains unsolved. Were there not bound up with that
a mysterious purpose, probably of the greatest biological meaning, then
certainly twenty centuries would not have yearned for it with such
intense longing. Doubtless, this sort of libidian current moves in the
same direction as, taken in the widest sense, did that ecstatic ideal of
the Middle Ages and of the ancient mystery cults, one of which became
the later Christianity. There is to be seen biologically in this ideal
an exercise of psychologic projection (of the paranoidian mechanism, as
Freud would express it).[83] The projection consists in the repressing
of the conflict into the unconscious and the setting forth of the
repressed contents into seeming objectivity, which is also the formula
of paranoia. The repression serves, as is well known, for the freeing
from a painful complex from which one must escape by all means because
its compelling and oppressing power is feared. The repression can lead
to an apparent complete suppression which corresponds to a strong
self-control. Unfortunately, however, self-control has limits which are
only too narrowly drawn. Closer observation of people shows, it is true,
that calm is maintained at the critical moment, but certain results
occur which fall into two categories.

_First_, the suppressed effect comes to the surface immediately
afterwards; seldom directly, it is true, but ordinarily in the form of a
displacement to another object (e. g. a person is, in official
relations, polite, submissive, patient, and so on, and turns his whole
anger loose upon his wife or his subordinates).

_Second_, the suppressed effect creates compensations elsewhere. For
example, people who strive for excessive ethics, who try always to
think, feel, and act altruistically and ideally, avenge themselves,
because of the impossibility of carrying out their ideals, by subtle
maliciousness, which naturally does not come into their own
consciousness as such, but which leads to misunderstandings and unhappy
situations. Apparently, then, all of these are only “especially
unfortunate circumstances,” or they are the guilt and malice of other
people, or they are tragic complications.

One is, indeed, freed of the conscious conflict, nevertheless it lies
invisible at one’s feet, and is stumbled over at every step. The technic
of the apparent suppressing and forgetting is inadequate because it is
not possible of achievement in the last analysis—it is in reality a mere
makeshift. The religious projection offers a much more effectual help.
In this one keeps the conflict in sight (care, pain, anxiety, and so on)
and gives it over to a personality standing outside of one’s self, the
Divinity. The evangelical command teaches us this:

  “Cast all your anxiety upon him, because he careth for you.”—_I Peter_
  v: 7.

  “In nothing be anxious; but in every thing by prayer and
  supplication ... let your requests be made known unto God.”—_Phil._
  iv: 6.

One must give the burdening complex of the soul consciously over to the
Deity; that is to say, associate it with a definite representation
complex which is set up as objectively real, as a person who answers
those questions, for us unanswerable. To this inner demand belongs the
candid avowal of sin and the Christian humility presuming such an
avowal. Both are for the purpose of making it possible for one to
examine one’s self and to know one’s self.[84] One may consider the
mutual avowal of sins as the most powerful support to this work of
education (“Confess, therefore, your sins one to another.”—James v: 16).
These measures aim at a conscious recognition of the conflicts,
thoroughly psychoanalytic, which is also _a conditio sine qua non_ of
the psychoanalytic condition of recovery. Just as psychoanalysis in the
hands of the physician, a secular method, sets up the real object of
transference as the one to take over the conflicts of the oppressed and
to solve them, so the Christian religion sets up the Saviour, considered
as real; “In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness
of sins....” (Eph. i: 7 and Col. i: 14.)[85] He is the deliverer and
redeemer of our guilt, a God who stands above sin, “who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth” (Pet. ii: 22). “Who his own self
bare our sins in his body upon the tree” (Pet. ii: 24). “Therefore
Christ has been sacrificed once to take away the sins of many” (Heb. ix:
28). The God, thus thought of, is distinguished as innocent in himself
and as the self-sacrificer. (These qualities are true also for that
amount of energy—libido—which belongs to the representation complex
designated the Redeemer.) The conscious projection towards which the
Christian education aims, offers, therefore, a double benefit: first,
one is kept conscious of the conflict (sins) of two opposing tendencies
mutually resistant, and through this one prevents a known trouble from
becoming, by means of repressing and forgetting, an unknown and
therefore so much more tormenting sorrow. Secondly, one lightens one’s
burden by surrendering it to him to whom all solutions are known. One
must not forget that the individual psychologic roots of the Deity, set
up as real by the pious, are concealed from him, and that he, although
unaware of this, still bears the burden alone and is still alone with
his conflict. This delusion would lead infallibly to the speedy breaking
up of the system, for Nature cannot indefinitely be deceived, but the
powerful institution of Christianity meets this situation. The command
in the book of James is the best expression of the psychologic
significance of this: “Bear ye one another’s burdens.”[86]

This is emphasized as especially important in order to preserve society
upright through mutual love (Transference); the Pauline writings leave
no doubt about this:

  “Through love be servants one to another.”—_Gal._ v: 13.

  “Let love of the brethren continue.”—_Heb._ xiii: 1.

  “And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and good works.
  Not forgetting our own assembling together as is the custom of some,
  but exhorting one another.”—_Heb._ x: 24–25.

We might say that the real transference taught in the Christian
community is the condition absolutely necessary for the efficacy of the
miracle of redemption; the first letter of John comes out frankly with
this:

  “He that loveth his brother abideth in the light.”—_I John_ ii: 10.

  “If we love one another, God abideth in us.”—_I John_ iv: 12.

The Deity continues to be efficacious in the Christian religion only
upon the foundation of brotherly love. Consequently, here too the
mystery of redemption is the unresisting real transference.[87] One may
properly ask one’s self, for what then is the Deity useful, if his
efficacy consists only in the _real transference_? To this also the
evangelical message has a striking answer:

  “Men are all brothers in Christ.”

  “So Christ also, having been once offered to bear the sins of many,
  shall appear a second time apart from sin to them that wait for him
  unto salvation.”—_Heb._ ix: 28.

The condition of transference among brothers is to be such as between
man and Christ, a spiritual one. As the history of ancient cults and
certain Christian sects shows, this explanation of the Christian
religion is an especially important one biologically, for the
psychologic intimacy creates certain shortened ways between men which
lead only too easily to that from which Christianity seeks to release
them, namely to the sexual relation with all those consequences and
necessities under which the really already highly civilized man had to
suffer at the beginning of our Christian era. For just as the ancient
religious experience was regarded distinctly as a bodily union with the
Deity,[88] just so was worship permeated with sexuality of every kind.
Sexuality lay only too close to the relations of people with each other.
The moral degeneracy of the first Christian century produced a moral
reaction arising out of the darkness of the lowest strata of society
which was expressed in the second and third centuries at its purest in
the two antagonistic religions, Christianity on the one side, and
Mithracism on the other. These religions strove after precisely that
higher form of social intercourse symbolic of a projected “become flesh”
idea (logos), whereby all those strongest impulsive energies of the
archaic man, formerly plunging him from one passion into another,[89]
and which seemed to the ancients like the compulsion of the evil
constellations, as εἱμαρμένη,[90] and which in the sense of later ages
might be translated as the driving force of the libido,[91] the δύναμις
κινητική[92] of Zeno, could be made use of for social preservation.[93]

It may be assumed most certainly that the domestication of humanity has
cost the greatest sacrifices. An age which produced the stoical ideal
must certainly have known why and against what it was created. The age
of Nero serves to set off effectually the famous extracts from the
forty-first letter of Seneca to Lucilius:

  “One drags the other into error, and how can we attain to salvation
  when no one bids us halt, when all the world drives us in deeper?”

  “Do you ever come across a man unafraid in danger, untouched by
  desires, happy in misfortune, peaceful in the midst of a storm,
  elevated above ordinary mortals, on the same plane as the gods, does
  not reverence seize you? Are you not compelled to say, ‘Such an
  exalted being is certainly something different from the miserable body
  which he inhabits?’ A divine strength rules there, such an excellent
  mind, full of moderation, raised above all trivialities, which smiles
  at that which we others fear or strive after: a heavenly power
  animates such a person, a thing of this kind does not exist without
  the coöperation of a deity. The largest part of such a being belongs
  to the region from which he came. Just as the sun’s rays touch the
  earth in reality and yet are at home only there from whence they come,
  so an eminent holy man associates with us. He is sent to us that we
  may learn to know the divine better, and although with us, still
  really belongs to his original home. He looks thither and reaches
  towards it; among us he walks as an exalted being.”

The people of this age had grown ripe for identification with the λόγος
(word) “become flesh,” for the founding of a new fellowship, united by
one idea,[94] in the name of which people could love each other and call
each other brothers.[95] The old vague idea of a μεσίτης (Messiah), of a
mediator in whose name new ways of love would be created, became a fact,
and with that humanity made an immense step forward. This had not been
brought about by a speculative, completely sophisticated philosophy, but
by an elementary need in the mass of people vegetating in spiritual
darkness. The profoundest necessities had evidently driven them towards
that, since humanity did not thrive in a state of dissoluteness.[96] The
meaning of those cults—I speak of Christianity and Mithracism—is clear;
it is a moral restraint of animal impulses.[97] The dynamic appearance
of both religions betrays something of that enormous feeling of
redemption which animated the first disciples and which we to-day
scarcely know how to appreciate, for these old truths are empty to us.
Most certainly we should still understand it, had our customs even a
breath of ancient brutality, for we can hardly realize in this day the
whirlwinds of the unchained libido which roared through the ancient Rome
of the Cæsars. The civilized man of the present day seems very far
removed from that. He has become merely neurotic. So for us the
necessities which brought forth Christianity have actually been lost,
since we no longer understand their meaning. We do not know against what
it had to protect us.[98] For enlightened people, the so-called
religiousness has already approached very close to a neurosis. In the
past two thousand years Christianity has done its work and has erected
barriers of repression, which protect us from the sight of our own
“sinfulness.” The elementary emotions of the libido have come to be
unknown to us, for they are carried on in the unconscious; therefore,
the belief which combats them has become hollow and empty. Let whoever
does not believe that a mask covers our religion, obtain an impression
for himself from the appearance of our modern churches, from which style
and art have long since fled.

With this we turn back to the question from which we digressed, namely,
whether or not Miss Miller has created something valuable with her poem.
If we bear in mind under what psychologic or moral conditions
Christianity came into existence; that is to say, at a time when fierce
brutality was an every-day spectacle, then we understand the religious
seizure of the whole personality and the worth of that religion which
defended the people of the Roman culture against the visible storms of
wickedness. It was not difficult for those people to remain conscious of
sin, for they saw it every day spread out before their eyes. The
religious product was at that time the accomplishment of the total
personality. Miss Miller not only undervalues her “sins,” but the
connection between the “depressing and unrelenting need” and her
religious product has even escaped her. Thus her poetical creation
completely loses the living value of a religious product. It is not much
more than a sentimental transformation of the erotic which is secretly
carried out close to consciousness and principally possesses the same
worth as the manifest content of the dream[99] with its uncertain and
delusive perishableness. Thus the poem is properly only a dream become
audible.

To the degree that the modern consciousness is eagerly busied with
things of a wholly other sort than religion, religion and its object,
original sin, have stepped into the background; that is to say, into the
unconscious in great part. Therefore, to-day man believes neither in the
one nor in the other. Consequently the Freudian school is accused of an
impure phantasy, and yet one might convince one’s self very easily with
a rather fleeting glance at the history of ancient religions and morals
as to what kind of demons are harbored in the human soul. With this
disbelief in the crudeness of human nature is bound up the disbelief in
the power of religion. The phenomenon, well known to every
psychoanalyst, of the unconscious transformation of an erotic conflict
into religious activity is something _ethically wholly worthless_ and
nothing but an hysterical production. Whoever, on the other hand, to his
conscious sin just as consciously places religion in opposition, does
something the greatness of which cannot be denied. This can be verified
by a backward glance over history. Such a procedure is sound religion.
_The unconscious recasting of the erotic into something religious lays
itself open to the reproach of a sentimental and ethically worthless
pose._

By means of the secular practice of the naïve projection which is, as we
have seen, nothing else than a veiled or indirect real-transference
(through the spiritual, through the logos), Christian training has
produced a widespread weakening of the animal nature so that a great
part of the strength of the impulses could be set free for the work of
social preservation and fruitfulness.[100] This abundance of libido, to
make use of this singular expression, pursues with a budding renaissance
(for example Petrarch) a course which outgoing antiquity had already
sketched out as religious; viz., the way of the transference to
nature.[101] The transformation of this libidinous interest is in great
part due to the Mithraic worship, which was a nature religion in the
best sense of the word;[102] while the primitive Christians exhibited
throughout an antagonistic attitude to the beauties of this world.[103]
I remember the passage of St. Augustine mentioned by J. Burckhardt:

  “Men draw thither to admire the heights of the mountains and the
  powerful waves of the sea—and to turn away from themselves.”

The foremost authority on the Mithraic cult, Franz Cumont,[104] says as
follows:

  “The gods were everywhere and mingled in all the events of daily life.
  The fire which cooked the means of nourishment for the believers and
  which warmed them; the water which quenched their thirst and cleansed
  them; also the air which they breathed, and the day which shone for
  them, were the objects of their homage. Perhaps no religion has given
  to its adherents in so large a degree as Mithracism opportunity for
  prayer and motive for devotion. When the initiated betook himself in
  the evening to the sacred grotto concealed in the solitude of the
  forest, at every step new sensations awakened in his heart some
  mystical emotion. The stars that shone in the sky, the wind that
  whispered in the foliage, the spring or brook which hastened murmuring
  to the valley, even the earth which he trod under his feet, were in
  his eyes divine; and all surrounding nature a worshipful fear of the
  infinite forces that swayed the universe.”

These fundamental thoughts of Mithracism, which, like so much else of
the ancient spiritual life, arose again from their grave during the
renaissance are to be found in the beautiful words of Seneca:[105]

  “When you enter a grove peopled with ancient trees, higher than the
  ordinary, and whose boughs are so closely interwoven that the sky
  cannot be seen, the stately shadows of the wood, the privacy of the
  place, and the awful gloom cannot but strike you, as with the presence
  of a deity, or when we see some cave at the foot of a mountain
  penetrating the rocks, not made by human hands, but hollowed out to
  great depths by nature; it fills the mind with a religious fear; we
  venerate the fountain-heads of great rivers; the sudden eruption of a
  vast body of water from the secret places of the earth, obtains an
  altar: we adore likewise the springs of warm baths, and either the
  opaque quality or immense depths, hath made some lakes sacred.”

All this disappeared in the transitory world of the Christian, only to
break forth much later when the thought of mankind had achieved that
_independence of the idea_ which could resist the æsthetic impression,
so that thought was no longer fettered by the emotional effects of the
impression, but could rise to reflective observation. Thus man entered
into a new and independent relation to nature whereby the foundation was
laid for natural science and technique. With that, however, there
entered in for the first time a displacement of the weight of interest;
there arose again real-transference which has reached its greatest
development in our time. Materialistic interest has everywhere become
paramount. Therefore, the realms of the spirit, where earlier the
greatest conflicts and developments took place, lie deserted and fallow;
the world has not only lost its God as the sentimentalists of the
nineteenth century bewail, but also to some extent has lost its soul as
well. One, therefore, cannot wonder that the discoveries and doctrines
of the Freudian school, with their wholly psychologic views, meet with
an almost universal disapproval. Through the change of the centre of
interest from the inner to the outer world, the knowledge of nature has
increased enormously in comparison with that of earlier times. By this
the anthropomorphic conception of the religious dogmas has been
definitely thrown open to question; therefore, the present-day religions
can only with the greatest difficulty close their eyes to this fact; for
not only has the intense interest been diverted from the Christian
religion, but criticism and the necessary correction have increased
correspondingly. The Christian religion seems to have fulfilled its
great biological purpose, in so far as we are able to judge. It has led
human thought to independence, and has lost its significance, therefore,
to a yet undetermined extent; in any case its dogmatic contents have
become related to Mithracism. In consideration of the fact that this
religion has rendered, nevertheless, inconceivable service to education,
one cannot reject it “eo ipso” to-day. It seems to me that we might
still make use in some way of its form of thought, and especially of its
great wisdom of life, which for two thousand years has been proven to be
particularly efficacious. The stumbling block is the _unhappy
combination of religion and morality_. That must be overcome. There
still remain traces of this strife in the soul, the lack of which in a
human being is reluctantly felt. It is hard to say in what such things
consist; for this, ideas as well as words are lacking. If, in spite of
that, I attempt to say something about it, I do it parabolically, using
Seneca’s words:[106]

  “Nothing can be more commendable and beneficial if you persevere in
  the pursuit of wisdom. It is what would be ridiculous to wish for when
  it is in your power to attain it. There is no need to lift up your
  hands to Heaven, or to pray the servant of the temple to admit you to
  the ear of the idol that your prayers may be heard the better. God is
  near thee; he is with thee. Yes, Lucilius, a holy spirit resides
  within us, the observer of good and evil, and our constant guardian.
  And as we treat him, he treats us; no good man is without a God. Could
  any one ever rise above the power of fortune without his assistance?
  It is he that inspires us with thoughts, upright, just and pure. We do
  not, indeed, pretend to say what God; but that a God dwells in the
  breast of every good man is certain.”




                               CHAPTER IV
                          THE SONG OF THE MOTH


A little later Miss Miller travelled from Geneva to Paris. She says:

  “My weariness on the railway was so great that I could hardly sleep an
  hour. It was terrifically hot in the ladies’ carriage.”

At four o’clock in the morning she noticed a moth that flew against the
light in her compartment. She then tried to go to sleep again. Suddenly
the following poem took possession of her mind.

                       _The Moth to the Sun_

       “I longed for thee when first I crawled to consciousness.
       My dreams were all of thee when in the chrysalis I lay.
       Oft myriads of my kind beat out their lives
       Against some feeble spark once caught from thee.
       And one hour more—and my poor life is gone;
       Yet my last effort, as my first desire, shall be
       But to approach thy glory; then, having gained
       One raptured glance, I’ll die content.
       For I, the source of beauty, warmth and life
       Have in his perfect splendor once beheld.”

Before we go into the material which Miss Miller offers us for the
understanding of the poem, we will again cast a glance over the
psychologic situation in which the poem originated. Some months or weeks
appear to have elapsed since the last direct manifestation of the
unconscious that Miss Miller reported to us; about this period we have
had no information. We learn nothing about the moods and phantasies of
this time. If one might draw a conclusion from this silence it would be
presumably that in the time which elapsed between the two poems, really
nothing of importance had happened, and that, therefore, this poem is
again but a voiced fragment of the unconscious working of the complex
stretching out over months and years. It is highly probable that it is
concerned with the same complex as before.[107] The earlier product, a
hymn of creation full of hope, has, however, but little similarity to
the present poem. The poem lying before us has a truly hopeless,
melancholy character; moth and sun, two things which never meet. One
must in fairness ask, is a moth really expected to rise to the sun? We
know indeed the proverbial saying about the moth that flew into the
light and singed its wings, but not the legend of the moth that strove
towards the sun. Plainly, here, two things are connected in her thoughts
that do not belong together; first, the moth which fluttered around the
light so long that it burnt itself; and then, the idea of a small
ephemeral being, something like the day fly, which, in lamentable
contrast to the eternity of the stars, longs for an imperishable
daylight. This idea reminds one of Faust:

       “Mark how, beneath the evening sunlight’s glow
       The green-embosomed houses glitter;
       The glow retreats, done is the day of toil,
       It yonder hastes, new fields of life exploring;
       Ah, that no wing can lift me from the soil
       Upon its track to follow, follow soaring!
       Then would I see eternal Evening gild
       The silent world beneath me glowing....
       Yet, finally, the weary god is sinking;
       The new-born impulse fires my mind,—
       I hasten on, his beams eternal drinking,
       The day before me and the night behind,
       Above me heaven unfurled, the floor of waves beneath me,—
       A glorious dream! though now the glories fade.
       Alas! the wings that lift the mind no aid
       Of wings to lift the body can bequeath me.”

Not long afterwards, Faust sees “the black dog roving there through
cornfields and stubble,” the dog who is the same as the devil, the
tempter, in whose hellish fires Faust has singed his wings. When he
believed that he was expressing his great longing for the beauty of the
sun and the earth, “he went astray thereover” and fell into the hands of
“the Evil One.”

            “Yes, resolute to reach some brighter distance,
            On earth’s fair sun I turn my back.”

This is what Faust had said shortly before, in true recognition of the
state of affairs. The honoring of the beauty of nature led the Christian
of the Middle Ages to pagan thoughts which lay in an antagonistic
relation to his conscious religion, just as once Mithracism was in
threatening competition with Christianity, for Satan often disguises
himself as an angel of light.[108]

The longing of Faust became his ruin. The longing for the Beyond had
brought as a consequence a loathing for life, and he stood on the brink
of self-destruction.[109] The longing for the beauty of this world led
him anew to ruin, into doubt and pain, even to Marguerite’s tragic
death. His mistake was that he followed after both worlds with no check
to the driving force of his libido, like a man of violent passion. Faust
portrays once more the folk-psychologic conflict of the beginning of the
Christian era, but what is noteworthy, in a reversed order.

Against what fearful powers of seduction Christ had to defend himself by
means of his hope of the absolute world beyond, may be seen in the
example of Alypius in Augustine. If any of us had been living in that
period of antiquity, he would have seen clearly that that culture must
inevitably collapse because humanity revolted against it. It is well
known that even before the spread of Christianity a remarkable
expectation of redemption had taken possession of mankind. The following
eclogue of Virgil might well be a result of this mood:

           “Ultima Cumæi venit jam carminis ætas;[110]
           Magnus ab integro Sæclorum nascitur ordo,
           Jam redit et Virgo,[111] redeunt Saturnia regna;
           Jam nova progenies cælo demittitur alto.
           Tu modo nascenti puero, quo ferrea primum
           Desinet ac toto surget gens aurea mundo,
           Casta fave Lucina: tuus jam regnat Apollo.

           “Te duce, si qua manent sceleris vestigia nostri,
           Inrita perpetua solvent formidine terras.
           Ille deum vitam accipiet divisque videbit
           Permixtos heroas et ipse videbitur illis,
           Pacatumque reget patriis virtutibus orbem.”[112]

The turning to asceticism resulting from the general expansion of
Christianity brought about a new misfortune to many: monasticism and the
life of the anchorite.[113]

Faust takes the reverse course; for him the ascetic ideal means death.
He struggles for freedom and wins life, at the same time giving himself
over to the Evil One; but through this he becomes the bringer of death
to her whom he loves most, Marguerite. He tears himself away from pain
and sacrifices his life in unceasing useful work, through which he saves
many lives.[114] His double mission as saviour and destroyer has already
been hinted in a preliminary manner:

  _Wagner_:

              With what a feeling, thou great man, must thou
              Receive the people’s honest veneration!

  _Faust_:

          Thus we, our hellish boluses compounding,
          Among these vales and hills surrounding,
          Worse than the pestilence, have passed.
          Thousands were done to death from poison of my giving;
          And I must hear, by all the living,
          The shameless murderers praised at last!

A parallel to this double rôle is that text in the Gospel of Matthew
which has become historically significant:

  “I came not to send peace, but a sword.”—_Matt._ x: 34.

Just this constitutes the deep significance of Goethe’s Faust, that he
clothes in words a problem of modern man which has been turning in
restless slumber since the Renaissance, just as was done by the drama of
Oedipus for the Hellenic sphere of culture. What is to be the way out
between the Scylla of renunciation of the world and the Charybdis of the
acceptance of the world?

The hopeful tone, voiced in the “Hymn to the God of Creation,” cannot
continue very long with our author. The pose simply promises, but does
not fulfil. The old longing will come again, for it is a peculiarity of
all complexes worked over merely in the unconscious[115] that they lose
nothing of their original amount of affect. Meanwhile, their outward
manifestations can change almost endlessly. One might therefore consider
the first poem as an unconscious longing to solve the conflict through
positive religiousness, somewhat in the same manner as they of the
earlier centuries decided their conscious conflicts by opposing to them
the religious standpoint. This wish does not succeed. Now with the
second poem there follows a second attempt which turns out in a
decidedly more material way; its thought is unequivocal. Only once
“having gained one raptured glance ...” and then—to die.

From the realms of the religious world, the attention, just as in
Faust,[116] turns towards the sun of this world, and already there is
something mingled with it which has another sense, that is to say, _the
moth which fluttered so long around the light that it burnt its wings_.

We now pass to that which Miss Miller offers for the better
understanding of the poem. She says:

  “This small poem made a profound impression upon me. I could not, of
  course, find immediately a sufficiently clear and direct explanation
  for it. However, a few days later when I once more read a certain
  philosophical work, which I had read in Berlin the previous winter,
  and which I had enjoyed very much, (I was reading it aloud to a
  friend), I came across the following words: ‘La même aspiration
  passionnée de la mite vers l’étoile, de l’homme vers Dieu.’ (The same
  passionate longing of the moth for the star, of man for God.) I had
  forgotten this sentence entirely, but it seemed very clear to me that
  precisely these words had reappeared in my hypnagogic poem. In
  addition to that it occurred to me that a play seen some years
  previously, ‘La Mite et La Flamme,’ was a further possible cause of
  the poem. It is easy to see how often the word ‘moth’ had been
  impressed upon me.”

The deep impression made by the poem upon the author shows that she put
into it a large amount of love. In the expression “aspiration
passionnée” we meet the passionate longing of the moth for the star, of
man for God, and indeed, the moth is Miss Miller herself. Her last
observation that the word “moth” was often impressed upon her shows how
often she had noticed the word “moth” as applicable to herself. _Her
longing for God resembles the longing of the moth for the “star.”_ The
reader will recall that this expression has already had a place in the
earlier material, “when the morning stars sang together,” that is to
say, the ship’s officer who sings on deck in the night watch. The
passionate longing for God is the same as that longing for the singing
morning stars. It was pointed out at great length in the foregoing
chapter that this analogy is to be expected: “Sic parvis componere magna
solebam.”

It is shameful or exalted just as one chooses, that the divine longing
of humanity, which is really the first thing to make it human, should be
brought into connection with an erotic phantasy. Such a comparison jars
upon the finer feelings. Therefore, one is inclined in spite of the
undeniable facts to dispute the connection. An Italian steersman with
brown hair and black moustache, and the loftiest, dearest conception of
humanity! These two things cannot be brought together; against this not
only our religious feelings revolt, but our taste also rebels.

It would certainly be unjust to make a comparison of the two objects as
concrete things since they are so heterogeneous. One loves a Beethoven
sonata but one loves caviar also. It would not occur to any one to liken
the sonata to caviar. It is a common error for one to judge the longing
according to the quality of the object. The appetite of the gourmand
which is only satisfied with goose liver and quail is no more
distinguished than the appetite of the laboring man for corned beef and
cabbage. The longing is the same; the object changes. Nature is
beautiful only by virtue of the longing and love given her by man. The
æsthetic attributes emanating from that has influence primarily on the
libido, which alone constitutes the beauty of nature. The dream
recognizes this well when it depicts a strong and beautiful feeling by
means of a representation of a beautiful landscape. Whenever one moves
in the territory of the erotic it becomes altogether clear how little
the object and how much the love means. The “sexual object” is as a rule
overrated far too much and that only on account of the extreme degree to
which libido is devoted to the object.

Apparently Miss Miller had but little left over for the officer, which
is humanly very intelligible. But in spite of that a deep and lasting
effect emanates from this connection which places divinity on a par with
the erotic object. The moods which apparently are produced by these
objects do not, however, spring from them, but are manifestations of her
strong love. When Miss Miller praises either God or the sun she means
her love, that deepest and strongest impulse of the human and animal
being.

The reader will recall that in the preceding chapter the following chain
of synonyms was adduced: the singer—God of sound—singing morning
star—creator—God of Light—sun—fire—God of Love.

At that time we had placed sun and fire in parentheses. Now they are
entitled to their right place in the chain of synonyms. With the
changing of the erotic impression from the affirmative to the negative
the symbols of light occur as the paramount object. In the second poem
where the longing is clearly exposed it is by no means the terrestrial
sun. Since the longing has been turned away from the real object, its
object has become, first of all, a subjective one, namely, God.
Psychologically, however, God is the name of a representation-complex
which is grouped around a strong feeling (the sum of libido). Properly,
the feeling is what gives character and reality to the complex.[117]
_The attributes and symbols of the divinity must belong in a consistent
manner to the feeling_ (_longing, love, libido, and so on_). If one
honors God, the sun or the fire, then one honors one’s own vital force,
the libido. It is as Seneca says: “God is near you, he is with you, in
you.” God is our own longing to which we pay divine honors.[118] If it
were not known how tremendously significant religion was, and is, this
marvellous play with one’s self would appear absurd. There must be
something more than this, however, because, notwithstanding its
absurdity, it is, in a certain sense, conformable to the purpose in the
highest degree. To bear a God within one’s self signifies a great deal;
it is a guarantee of happiness, of power, indeed even of omnipotence, as
far as these attributes belong to the Deity. To bear a God within one’s
self signifies just as much as to be God one’s self. In Christianity,
where, it is true, the grossly sensual representations and symbols are
weeded out as carefully as possible, which seems to be a continuation of
the poverty of symbols of the Jewish cult, there are to be found plain
traces of this psychology. There are even plainer traces, to be sure, in
the “becoming-one with God” in those mysteries closely related to the
Christian, where the mystic himself is lifted up to divine adoration
through initiatory rites. At the close of the consecration into the Isis
mysteries the mystic was crowned with the palm crown,[119] he was placed
on a pedestal and worshipped as Helios.[120] In the magic papyrus of the
Mithraic liturgy published by Dieterich there is the ἱερός λόγος[121] of
the consecrated one:

  Ἐγώ εἰμι σύμπλανος ὑμῖν ἀστὴρ καὶ ἐκ τοῦ βάθους ἀναλάμπων.[122]

The mystic in religious ecstasies put himself on a plane with the stars,
just as a saint of the Middle Ages put himself by means of the stigmata
on a level with Christ. St. Francis of Assisi expressed this in a truly
pagan manner,[123] even as far as a close relationship with the brother
sun and the sister moon. These representations of “becoming-one with
God” are very ancient. The old belief removed the becoming-one with God
until the time after death; the mysteries, however, suggest this as
taking place already in this world. A very old text brings most
beautifully before one this unity with God; it is the song of triumph of
the ascending soul.[124]

             “I am the God Atum, I who alone was.
             I am the God Rê at his first splendor.
             I am the great God, self-created, God of Gods,
             To whom no other God compares.”

  “I was yesterday and know to-morrow; the battle-ground of Gods was
  made when I spoke. I know the name of that great God who tarries
  therein.

  “I am that great Phoenix who is in Heliopolis, who there keeps account
  of all there is, of all that exists.

  “I am the God Min, at his coming forth, who placed the feathers upon
  my head.[125]

  “I am in my country, I come into my city. Daily I am together with my
  father Atum.[126]

  “My impurity is driven away, and the sin which was in me is overcome.
  I washed myself in those two great pools of water which are in
  Heracleopolis, in which is purified the sacrifice of mankind for that
  great God who abideth there.

  “I go on my way to where I wash my head in the sea of the righteous. I
  arrive at this land of the glorified, and enter through the splendid
  portal.

  “Thou, who standest before me, stretch out to me thy hands, it is I, I
  am become one of thee. Daily am I together with my Father Atum.”

The identification with God necessarily has as a result the enhancing of
the meaning and power of the individual.[127] That seems, first of all,
to have been really its purpose: a strengthening of the individual
against his all too great weakness and insecurity in real life. This
great megalomania thus has a genuinely pitiable background. The
strengthening of the consciousness of power is, however, only an
external result of the “becoming-one with God.” Of much more
significance are the deeper-lying disturbances in the realm of feeling.
_Whoever introverts libido—that is to say, whoever takes it away from a
real object without putting in its place a real compensation—is
overtaken by the inevitable results of introversion._ The libido, which
is turned inward into the subject, awakens again from among the sleeping
remembrances one which contains the path upon which earlier the libido
once had come to the real object. At the very first and in foremost
position it was father and mother who were the objects of the childish
love. They are unequalled and imperishable. Not many difficulties are
needed in an adult’s life to cause those memories to reawaken and to
become effectual. _In religion the regressive reanimation of the
father-and-mother imago is organized into a system._ The benefits of
religion are the benefits of parental hands; its protection and its
peace are the results of parental care upon the child; its mystic
feelings are the unconscious memories of the tender emotions of the
first childhood, just as the hymn expresses it:

  “I am in my country, I come into my city. Daily am I together with my
  father Atum.”[128]

The visible father of the world is, however, the sun, the heavenly fire;
therefore, Father, God, Sun, Fire are mythologically synonymous. The
well-known fact that in the sun’s strength the great generative power of
nature is honored shows plainly, very plainly, to any one to whom as yet
it may not be clear that in the Deity man honors his own libido, and
naturally in the form of the image or symbol of the present object of
transference. This symbol faces us in an especially marked manner in the
third Logos of the Dieterich papyrus. After the second prayer[129] stars
come from the disc of the sun to the mystic, “five-pointed, in
quantities, filling the whole air. If the sun’s disc has expanded, you
will see an immeasurable circle, and fiery gates which are shut off.”
The mystic utters the following prayer:

  Ἐπακουσόν μου, ἀκουσόν μου—ὁ συνδήσας πνεύματι τὰ πύρινα κλεῖθρα τοῦ
  οὐρανοῦ, δισώματος πυρίπολε, φωτὸς κτίστα—πυρίπνοε, πυρίθυμε,
  πνευματόφως, πυριχαρῆ, καλλίφως, φωτοκράτωρ, πυρισώματε, φωτοδότα,
  πυρισπόρε, πυρικλόνε, φωτόβιε, πυριδῖνα, φωτοκινῆτα, κεραυνοκλόνε,
  φωτὸς κλέος, αὐξησίφως, ἐνπυρισχησίφως, ἀστροδάμα.[130]

The invocation is, as one sees, almost inexhaustible in light and fire
attributes, and can be likened in its extravagance only to the
synonymous attributes of love of the mystic of the Middle Ages. Among
the innumerable texts which might be used as an illustration of this, I
select a passage from the writings of Mechthild von Magdeburg
(1212–1277):

  “O Lord, love me excessively and love me often and long; the oftener
  you love me, so much the purer do I become; the more excessively you
  love me, the more beautiful I become; the longer you love me, the more
  holy will I become here upon earth.”

  God answered: “That I love you often, that I have from my nature, for
  I myself am love. That I love you excessively, that I have from my
  desire, for I too desire that men love me excessively. That I love you
  long, that I have from my everlastingness, for I am without end.”[131]

The religious regression makes use indeed of the parent image without,
however, consciously making it an object of transference, for the incest
horror[132] forbids that. It remains rather as a synonym, for example,
of the father or of God, or of the more or less personified symbol of
the sun and fire.[133] Sun and fire—that is to say, the fructifying
strength and heat—are attributes of the libido. In Mysticism the
inwardly perceived, divine vision is often merely sun or light, and is
very little, or not at all, personified. In the Mithraic liturgy there
is found, for example, a significant quotation:

  Ἡ δὲ πορεία τῶν ὁρωμένων θεῶν διὰ τοῦ δίσκου, πατρός μου, θεοῦ
  φανήσεται.[134]

Hildegarde von Bingen (1100–1178) expresses herself in the following
manner:[135]

  “But the light I see is not local, but far off, and brighter than the
  cloud which supports the sun. I can in no way know the form of this
  light since I cannot entirely see the sun’s disc. But within this
  light I see at times, and infrequently, another light which is called
  by me the living light, but when and in what manner I see this I do
  not know how to say, and when I see it all weariness and need is
  lifted from me, then too, I feel like a simple girl and not like an
  old woman.”

Symeon, the New Theologian (970–1040), says the following:

  “My tongue lacks words, and what happens in me my spirit sees clearly
  but does not explain. It sees the invisible, that emptiness of all
  forms, simple throughout, not complex, and in extent infinite. For it
  sees no beginning, and it sees no end. It is entirely unconscious of
  the meanings, and does not know what to call that which it sees.
  Something complete appears, it seems to me, not indeed through the
  being itself, but through a participation. For you enkindle fire from
  fire, and you receive the whole fire; but this remains undiminished
  and undivided, as before. Similarly, that which is divided separates
  itself from the first; and like something corporeal spreads itself
  into several lights. This, however, is something spiritual,
  immeasurable, indivisible, and inexhaustible. For it is not separated
  when it becomes many, but remains undivided and is in me, and enters
  within my poor heart like a sun or circular disc of the sun, similar
  to the light, for it is a light.”[136]

That that thing, perceived as inner light, as the sun of the other
world, is longing, is clearly shown by Symeon’s words:[137]

  “And following It my spirit demanded to embrace the splendor beheld,
  but it found It not as creature and did not succeed in coming out from
  among created beings, so that it might embrace that uncreated and
  uncomprehended splendor. Nevertheless it wandered everywhere, and
  strove to behold It. _It penetrated the air, it wandered over the
  Heavens, it crossed over the abysses, it searched, as it seemed to it,
  the ends of the world._[138] But in all of that it found nothing, for
  all was created. And I lamented and was sorrowful, and my breast
  burned, and I lived as one distraught in mind. But It came, as It
  would, and descending like a luminous mystic cloud, It seemed to
  envelop my whole head so that dismayed I cried out. But flying away
  again It left me alone. And when I, troubled, sought for It, I
  realized suddenly _that It was in me, myself, and in the midst of my
  heart It appeared as the light of a spherical sun_.”

In Nietzsche’s “Glory and Eternity” we meet with an essentially similar
symbol:

         “Hush! I see vastness!—and of vasty things
         Shall man be done, unless he can enshrine
         Them with his words? Then take the night which brings
         The heart upon thy tongue, charmed wisdom mine!

         “I look above, there rolls the star-strewn sea.
         O night, mute silence, voiceless cry of stars!
         And lo! A sign! The heaven its verge unbars—
         A shining constellation falls towards me.”[139]

It is not astonishing if Nietzsche’s great inner loneliness calls again
into existence certain forms of thought which the mystic ecstasy of the
old cults has elevated to ritual representation. In the visions of the
Mithraic liturgy we have to deal with many similar representations which
we can now understand without difficulty as the ecstatic symbol of the
libido:

  Μετὰ δὲ τὸ ειπεῖν σε τὸν δεύτερον λόγον, ὅπου σιγὴ δὶς καὶ τὰ
  ἀκόλουθα, σύρισον δὶς καὶ πόππυσον δὶς καὶ εὐθέως ὄψει ἀπὸ τοῦ δίσκου
  ἀστέρας προσερχομένους πενταδακτυλιαίους πλείστους καὶ πιπλῶντας ὅλον
  τὸν αέρα. Σὺ δὲ πάλιν λέγε: σιγή, σιγή. Καὶ τοῦ δίσκου ἀνοιγέντος ὄψει
  ἄπειρον κύκλωμα καὶ θύρας πυρίνας ἀποκεκλεισμένας.[140]

Silence is commanded, then the vision of light is revealed. The
similarity of the mystic’s condition and Nietzsche’s poetical vision is
surprising. Nietzsche says “constellation.” It is well known that
constellations are chiefly therio- or anthropo-morphic symbols.

The papyrus says, ἀστέρας πενταδακτυλιαίους[141] (similar to the
“rosy-fingered” Eos), which is nothing else than an anthropomorphic
image. Accordingly, one may expect from that, that by long gazing a
living being would be formed out of the “flame image,” a “star
constellation” of therio- or anthropo-morphic nature, for the symbolism
of the libido does not end with sun, light and fire, but makes use of
wholly other means of expression. I yield precedence to Nietzsche:

                            _The Beacon_[142]

            “Here, where the island grew amid the seas,
            A sacrificial rock high-towering,
            Here under darkling heavens,
            Zarathustra lights his mountain-fires.

            “These flames with grey-white belly,
            In cold distances sparkle their desire,
            Stretches its neck towards ever purer heights—
            A snake upreared in impatience:

            “This signal I set up there before me.
            This flame is mine own soul,
            Insatiable for new distances,
            Speeding upward, upward its silent heat.

            “At all lonely ones I now throw my fishing rod.
            Give answer to the flame’s impatience,
            Let me, the fisher on high mountains,
            Catch my seventh, last solitude!”

Here libido becomes fire, flame and snake. The Egyptian symbol of the
“living disc of the sun,” the disc with the two entwining snakes,
contains the combination of both the libido analogies. The disc of the
sun with its fructifying warmth is analogous to the fructifying warmth
of love. The comparison of the libido with sun and fire is in reality
analogous.

There is also a “causative” element in it, for sun and fire as
beneficent powers are objects of human love; for example, the sun-hero
Mithra is called the “well-beloved.” In Nietzsche’s poem the comparison
is also a causative one, but this time in a reversed sense. The
comparison with the snake is unequivocally phallic, corresponding
completely with the tendency in antiquity, which was to see in the
symbol of the phallus the quintessence of life and fruitfulness. _The
phallus is the source of life and libido, the great creator and worker
of miracles_, and as such it received reverence everywhere. We have,
therefore, three designating symbols of the libido: First, the
_comparison by analogy_, as sun and fire. Second, the _comparisons based
on causative relations_, as A: Object comparison. The libido is
designated by its object, for example, the beneficent sun. B: _The
subject comparison_, in which the libido is designated by its place of
origin or by analogies of this, for example, by phallus or (analogous)
snake.

To these two fundamental forms of comparison still a third is added, in
which the “tertium comparationis” is _the activity_; for example, the
libido is dangerous when fecundating like the bull—through the power of
its passion—like the lion, like the raging boar when in heat, like the
ever-rutting ass, and so on.

This activity comparison can belong equally well to the category of the
analogous or to the category of the causative comparisons. _The
possibilities of comparison mean just as many possibilities for symbolic
expression_, and from this basis all the infinitely varied symbols, so
far as they are libido images, may properly be reduced to a very simple
root, that is, just to _libido and its fixed primitive qualities_. This
psychologic reduction and simplification is in accordance with the
historic efforts of civilization to unify and simplify, to syncretize,
the endless number of the gods. We come across this desire as far back
as the old Egyptians, where the unlimited polytheism as exemplified in
the numerous demons of places finally necessitated simplification. All
the various local gods, Amon of Thebes, Horus of Edfu, Horus of the
East, Chnum of Elephantine, Atum of Heliopolis, and others,[143] became
identified with the sun God Rê. In the hymns to the sun the composite
being Amon-Rê-Harmachis-Atum was invoked as “the only god which truly
lives.”[144]

Amenhotep IV (XVIII dynasty) went the furthest in this direction. He
replaced all former gods by the “living great disc of the sun,” the
official title reading:

  “The sun ruling both horizons, triumphant in the horizon in his name;
  the glittering splendor which is in the sun’s disc.”

“And, indeed,” Erman adds,[145] “the sun, as a God, should not be
honored, but the sun itself as a planet which imparts through its
rays[146] the infinite life which is in it to all living creatures.”

Amenhotep IV by his reform completed a work which is psychologically
important. He united all the bull,[147] ram,[148] crocodile[149] and
pile-dwelling[150] gods into the disc of the sun, and made it clear that
their various attributes were compatible with the sun’s attributes.[151]
A similar fate overtook the Hellenic and Roman polytheism through the
syncretistic efforts of later centuries. The beautiful prayer of
Lucius[152] to the queen of the Heavens furnishes an important proof of
this:

  “Queen of Heaven, whether thou art the genial Ceres, the prime parent
  of fruits;—or whether thou art celestial Venus;—or whether thou art
  the sister of Phœbus;—or whether thou art Proserpina, terrific with
  midnight howlings—with that feminine brightness of thine illuminating
  the walls of every city.”[153]

This attempt to gather again into a few units the religious thoughts
which were divided into countless variations and personified in
individual gods according to their polytheistic distribution and
separation makes clear the fact that already at an earlier time
analogies had formally arisen. Herodotus is rich in just such
references, not to mention the systems of the Hellenic-Roman world.
Opposed to the endeavor to form a unity there stands a still stronger
endeavor to create again and again a multiplicity, so that even in the
so-called severe monotheistic religions, as Christianity, for example,
the polytheistic tendency is irrepressible. The Deity is divided into
three parts at least, to which is added the feminine Deity of Mary and
the numerous company of the lesser gods, the angels and saints,
respectively. These two tendencies are in constant warfare. There is
only one God with countless attributes, or else there are many gods who
are then simply known differently, according to locality, and personify
sometimes this, sometimes that attribute of the fundamental thought, an
example of which we have seen above in the Egyptian gods.

With this we turn once more to Nietzsche’s poem, “The Beacon.” We found
the flame there used as an image of the libido, theriomorphically
represented as a snake (also as an image of the soul:[154] “This flame
is mine own soul”). We saw that the snake is to be taken as a phallic
image of the libido (upreared in impatience), and that this image, also
an attribute of the conception of the sun (the Egyptian sun idol), is an
image of the libido in the combination of sun and phallus. It is not a
wholly strange conception, therefore, that the sun’s disc is represented
with a penis, as well as with hands and feet. We find proof for this
idea in a peculiar part of the Mithraic liturgy: ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ὁ
καλούμενος αὐλός, ἡ ἀρχὴ τοῦ λειτουργοῦντος ἀνέμου. Ὄψει γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ
δίσκου ὡς αὐλὸν κρεμάμενον.[155]

This extremely important vision of a tube hanging down from the sun
would produce in a religious text, such as that of the Mithraic liturgy,
a strange and at the same time meaningless effect if it did not have the
phallic meaning. The tube is the place of origin of the wind. The
phallic meaning seems very faint in this idea, but one must remember
that the wind, as well as the sun, is a fructifier and creator. This has
already been pointed out in a footnote.[156] There is a picture by a
Germanic painter of the Middle Ages of the “conceptio immaculata” which
deserves mention here. The conception is represented by a tube or pipe
coming down from heaven and passing beneath the skirt of Mary. Into this
flies the Holy Ghost in the form of a dove for the impregnation of the
Mother of God.[157]

Honegger discovered the following hallucination in an insane man
(paranoid dement): The patient sees in the sun an “upright tail” similar
to an erected penis. When he moves his head back and forth, then, too,
the sun’s penis sways back and forth in a like manner, and out of that
the wind arises. This strange hallucination remained unintelligible to
us for a long time until I became acquainted with the Mithraic liturgy
and its visions. This hallucination threw an illuminating light, as it
appears to me, upon a very obscure place in the text which immediately
follows the passage previously cited:

  εἰς δὲ τὰ μέρη τὰ πρὸς λίβα ἀπέραντον οἷον ἀπηλιώτην. Ἐὰν ᾖ
  κεκληρώμενος εἰς δὲ τὰ μέρη τοῦ ἀπηλιώτου ὁ ἕτερος, ὁμοίως εἰς τὰ μέρη
  τὰ ἐκείνου ὄψει τὴν ἀποφορὰν τοῦ ὁρμάτος.

Mead translates this very clearly:[158]

  “And towards the regions westward, as though it were an infinite
  Eastwind. But if the other wind, towards the regions of the East,
  should be in service, in the like fashion shalt thou see towards the
  regions of that side the converse of the sight.”

In the original ὅραμα is the vision, the thing seen. ἀποφορά means
properly the carrying away. The sense of the text, according to this,
might be: the thing seen may be carried or turned sometimes here,
sometimes there, according to the direction of the wind. The ὅραμα is
the tube, “the place of origin of the wind,” which turns sometimes to
the east, sometimes to the west, and, one might add, generates the
corresponding wind. The vision of the insane man coincides astonishingly
with this description of the movement of the tube.[159]

The various attributes of the sun, separated into a series, appear one
after the other in the Mithraic liturgy. According to the vision of
Helios, seven maidens appear with the heads of snakes, and seven gods
with the heads of black bulls.

It is easy to understand the maiden as a symbol of the libido used in
the sense of causative comparison. The snake in Paradise is usually
considered as feminine, as the seductive principle in woman, and is
represented as feminine by the old artists, although properly the snake
has a phallic meaning. Through a similar change of meaning the snake in
antiquity becomes the symbol of the earth, which on its side is always
considered feminine. The bull is the well-known symbol for the
fruitfulness of the sun. The bull gods in the Mithraic liturgy were
called κνωθακοφύλακες, “guardians of the axis of the earth,” by whom the
axle of the orb of the heavens was turned. The divine man, Mithra, also
had the same attributes; he is sometimes called the “Sol invictus”
itself, sometimes the mighty companion and ruler of Helios; he holds in
his right hand the “bear constellation, which moves and turns the
heavens.” The bull-headed gods, equally ἱεροὶ καὶ ἄλκιμοι νεανίαι with
Mithra himself, to whom the attribute νεώτερος, “young one,” “the
newcomer,” is given, are merely attributive components of the same
divinity. The chief god of the Mithraic liturgy is himself subdivided
into Mithra and Helios; the attributes of each of these are closely
related to the other. Of Helios it is said: ὄψει θεὸν νεώτερον εὐειδῆ
πυρινότριχα ἐν χιτῶνι λευκῷ καὶ χλαμύδι κοκκίνῃ, ἔχοντα πύρινον
στέφανον.[160]

Of Mithra it is said: ὄψει θεὸν ὑπερμεγέθη, φωτινὴν ἔχοντα τὴν ὄψιν,
νεώτερον, χρυσοκόμαν, ἐν χιτῶνι λευκῳ καὶ χρυσῳ στεφάνῳ καὶ ἀναξυρίσι,
κατέχοντα τῇ δεξιᾷ χειρὶ μόσχου ὦμόν χρύσεον, ὅς ἐστιν ἄρκτος ἡ κινοῦσα
καὶ ἀντιστρέφουσα τὸν οὐρανόν, κατὰ ὥραν ἀναπολεύουσα καὶ καταπολεύουσα.
ἔπειτα ὄψει αὐτοῦ ἐκ τῶν ὀμμάτων ἀστραπὰς καὶ ἐκ τοῦ σώματος ἀστέρας
ἁλλομένους.[161]

If we place fire and gold as essentially similar, then a great accord is
found in the attributes of the two gods. To these mystical pagan ideas
there deserve to be added the probably almost contemporaneous vision of
Revelation:

  “And being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks. And in the midst
  of the candlesticks[162] one like unto the son of man, clothed with a
  garment down to the foot, and girt about at the breasts with a golden
  girdle. And his head and his hair were white as white wool, white as
  snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire. And his feet like unto
  burnished brass, as if it had been refined in a furnace; and his voice
  as the sound of many waters. And he had in his right hand seven
  stars,[163] and out of his mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged
  sword,[164] and his countenance was as the sun shineth in his
  strength.”—_Rev._ i: 12 ff.

  “And I looked, and beheld a white cloud, and upon the cloud I saw one
  sitting like unto the son of man, having on his head a golden crown,
  and in his hand a sharp sickle.”[165]—_Rev._ xiv: 14.

  “And his eyes were as a flame of fire, and upon his head were many
  diadems. And he was arrayed in a garment[166] sprinkled with blood....
  And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses,
  clothed in fine linen,[167] white and pure. And out of his mouth
  proceeded a sharp sword.”—_Rev._ xix: 12–15.

One need not assume that there is a direct dependency between the
Apocalypse and the Mithraic liturgy. The visionary images of both texts
are developed from a source, not limited to one place, but found in the
soul of many divers people, because the symbols which arise from it are
too typical for it to belong to one individual only. I put these images
here to show how the primitive symbolism of light gradually developed,
with the increasing depth of the vision, into the idea of the sun-hero,
the “well-beloved.”[168] The development of the symbol of light is
thoroughly typical. In addition to this, perhaps I might call to mind
the fact that I have previously pointed out this course with numerous
examples,[169] and, therefore, I can spare myself the trouble of
returning to this subject.[170] These visionary occurrences are the
psychological roots of the sun-coronations in the mysteries. Its rite is
religious hallucination congealed into liturgical form, which, on
account of its great regularity, could become a generally accepted outer
form. After all this, it is easily understood how the ancient Christian
Church, on one side, stood in an especial bond to Christ as “sol novus,”
and, on the other side, had a certain difficulty in freeing itself from
the earthly symbols of Christ. Indeed Philo of Alexandria saw in the sun
the image of the divine logos or of the Deity especially (“De Somniis,”
1:85). In an Ambrosian hymn Christ is invoked by “O sol salutis,” and so
on. At the time of Marcus Aurelius, Meliton, in his work,[171] περὶ
λούτρου, called Christ the Ἥλιος ἀνατολης ... μόνος ἥλιος οὗτος
ἀνέτειλεν ἀπ’ οὐρανοῦ.[172]

Still more important is a passage from Pseudo-Cyprian:[173]

  “O quam præclara providentia ut illo die quo factus est sol, in ipso
  die nasceretur Christus, v. Kal. Apr. feria IV, et ideo de ipso ad
  plebem dicebat Malachias propheta: ‘Orietur vobis sol iustitiæ et
  curatio est in pennis ejus,’ hic est sol iustitiæ cuius in pennis
  curatio præostendebatur.”[174][175]

In a work nominally attributed to John Chrysostomus, “De Solstitiis et
Aequinoctiis,”[176] occurs this passage:

  “Sed et dominus nascitur mense Decembri hiemis tempore, VIII. Kal.
  Januarias, quando oleæ maturæ præmuntur ut unctio, id est Chrisma,
  nascatur—sed et Invicti natalem appellant. Quis utique tam invictus
  nisi dominus noster qui mortem subactam devicit? Vel quod dicant Solis
  esse natalem, ipse est sol iustitiæ, de quo Malachias propheta dixit:
  ‘Dominus lucis ac noctis conditor et discretor qui a propheta Sol
  iustitiæ cognominatus est.’”[177]

According to the testimony of Eusebius of Alexandria, the Christians
also shared in the worship of the rising sun, which lasted into the
fifth century:

  οὐαῖ τοῖς προσκυνοῦσι τὸν ἥλιον καὶ τὴν σελήνην καὶ τοὺς ἀστέρας.
  Πολλοὺς γὰρ οἶδα τοὺς προσκυνοῦντας καὶ εὐχομένους εἰς τὸν ἥλιον. Ἤδη
  γὰρ ἀνατείλαντος τοῦ ἡλίου, προσεύχονται καὶ λέγουσιν “Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς”
  καὶ οὐ μόνον Ἡλιογνώσται καὶ αἱρετικοὶ τοῦτο ποιοῦσιν ἀλλὰ καὶ
  χριστιανοὶ καὶ ἀφέντες τὴν πίστιν τοῖς αἱρετικοῖς συναμίγνυνται.[178]

Augustine preached emphatically to the Christians:

  “Non est Dominus Sol factus sed per quem Sol factus est—ne quis
  carnaliter sapiens Solem istum (Christum) intelligendum putaret.”

Art has preserved much of the remnants of sun-worship,[179] thus the
nimbus around the head of Christ and the halo of the saints in general.
The Christian legends also attribute many fire and light symbols to the
saints.[180] The twelve apostles, for example, are likened to the twelve
signs of the zodiac, and are represented, therefore, with a star over
the head.[181]

It is not to be wondered at that the heathen, as Tertullian avows,
considered the sun as the Christian God. Among the Manichaeans God was
really the sun. One of the most remarkable works extant, where the
Pagan, Asiatic, Hellenic and Christian intermingle, is the Ἐξήγησις περὶ
των ἐν Περσίδι πραχθέντων, edited by Wirth.[182] This is a book of
fables, but, nevertheless, a mine for near-Christian phantasies, which
gives a profound insight into Christian symbolism. In this is found the
following magical dedication: Διὶ Ἡλίῳ θεῳ μεγάλῳ βασιλεῖ Ἰησοῦ—.[183]
In certain parts of Armenia the rising sun is still worshipped by
Christians, that “it may let its foot rest upon the faces of the
worshippers.”[184] The foot occurs as an anthropomorphic attribute, and
we have already met the theriomorphic attribute in the feathers and the
sun phallus. Other comparisons of the sun’s ray, as knife, sword, arrow,
and so on, have also, as we have learned from the psychology of the
dream, a phallic meaning at bottom. This meaning is attached to the foot
as I here point out,[185] and also to the feathers, or hair, of the sun,
which signify the power or strength of the sun. I refer to the story of
Samson, and to that of the Apocalypse of Baruch, concerning the phœnix
bird, which, flying before the sun, loses its feathers, and, exhausted,
is strengthened again in an ocean bath at evening.

Under the symbol of “moth and sun” we have dug down into the historic
depths of the soul, and in doing this we have uncovered an old buried
idol, the youthful, beautiful, fire-encircled and halo-crowned sun-hero,
who, forever unattainable to the mortal, wanders upon the earth, causing
night to follow day; winter, summer; death, life; and who returns again
in rejuvenated splendor and gives light to new generations. The longing
of the dreamer concealed behind the moth stands for him.

The ancient pre-Asiatic civilizations were acquainted with a sun-worship
having the idea of a God dying and rising again (Osiris, Tammuz,
Attis-Adonis),[186] Christ, Mithra and his bull,[187] Phœnix and so on.
The beneficent power as well as the destroying power was worshipped in
fire. The forces of nature always have two sides, as we have already
seen in the God of Job. This reciprocal bond brings us back once more to
Miss Miller’s poem. Her reminiscences support our previous supposition,
that the symbol of moth and sun is a condensation of two ideas, about
one of which we have just spoken; the other is the moth and the flame.
As the title of a play, about the contents of which the author tells us
absolutely nothing, “Moth and Flame” may easily have the well-known
erotic meaning of flying around the flame of passion until one’s wings
are burned. The passionate longing, that is to say, the libido, has its
two sides; it is power which beautifies everything, and which under
other circumstances destroys everything. It often appears as if one
could not accurately understand in what the destroying quality of the
creative power consists. A woman who gives herself up to passion,
particularly under the present-day condition of culture, experiences the
destructive side only too soon. One has only to imagine one’s self a
little away from the every-day moral conditions in order to understand
what feelings of extreme insecurity overwhelm the individual who gives
himself unconditionally over to Fate.

To be fruitful means, indeed, to destroy one’s self, because with the
rise of the succeeding generation the previous one has passed beyond its
highest point; thus our descendants are our most dangerous enemies, whom
we cannot overcome, for they will outlive us, and, therefore, without
fail, will take the power from our enfeebled hands. The anxiety in the
face of the erotic fate is wholly understandable, for there is something
immeasurable therein. Fate usually hides unknown dangers, and the
perpetual hesitation of the neurotic to venture upon life is easily
explained by his desire to be allowed to stand still, so as not to take
part in the dangerous battle of life.[188] _Whoever renounces the chance
to experience must stifle in himself the wish for it, and, therefore,
commits a sort of self-murder._ From this the death phantasies which
readily accompany the renunciation of the erotic wish are made clear. In
the poem _Miss Miller has voiced these phantasies_.

She adds further to the material with the following:

  “I had been reading a selection from one of Byron’s poems which
  pleased me very much and made a deep and lasting impression. Moreover,
  the rhythm of my last two verses, ‘For I the source, etc.,’ and the
  two lines of Byron’s are very similar.

             ‘Now let me die as I have lived in faith,
             Nor tremble though the universe should quake.’”

This reminiscence with which the series of ideas is closed confirms the
death phantasies which follow from renunciation of the erotic wish. The
quotation comes—which Miss Miller did not mention—from an uncompleted
poem of Byron’s called “Heaven and Earth.”[189] The whole verse follows:

               “Still blessed be the Lord,
               For what is passed,
               For that which is;
               For all are His,
               From first to last—
               Time—Space—Eternity—Life—Death—
               The vast known and immeasurable unknown
               He made and can unmake,
               And shall I for a little gasp of breath
               Blaspheme and groan?
               No, let me die as I have lived in faith,
               Nor quiver though the universe may quake!”

The words are included in a kind of praise or prayer, spoken by a
“mortal” who is in hopeless flight before the mounting deluge. Miss
Miller puts herself in the same situation in her quotation; that is to
say, she readily lets it be seen that her feeling is similar to the
despondency of the unhappy ones who find themselves hard pressed by the
threatening mounting waters of the deluge. With this the writer allows
us a deep look into the dark abyss of her longing for the sun-hero. We
see that her longing is in vain; she is a mortal, only for a short time
borne upwards into the light by means of the highest longing, and then
sinking to death, or, much more, urged upwards by the fear of death,
like the people before the deluge, and in spite of the desperate
conflict, irretrievably given over to destruction. This is a mood which
recalls vividly the closing scene in “Cyrano de Bergerac”:[190]

         _Cyrano_:

         Oh, mais ... puisqu’elle est en chemin,
         Je l’attendrai debout ... et l’épée à la main.

         Que dites-vous?... C’est inutile? Je le sais.
         Mais on ne se bat pas dans l’espoir du succès.
         Non, non. C’est bien plus beau lorsque c’est inutile.

         Je sais bien qu’à la fin vous me mettrez à bas....

We already know sufficiently well what longing and what impulse it is
that attempts to clear a way for itself to the light, but that it may be
realized quite clearly and irrevocably, it is shown plainly in the
quotation “No, let me die,” which confirms and completes all earlier
remarks. The divine, the “much-beloved,” who is honored in the image of
the sun, is also the goal of the longing of our poet.

Byron’s “Heaven and Earth” is a mystery founded on the following passage
from Genesis, chapter vi:2: “And it came to pass ... that the sons of
God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them
wives of all that they chose.” Byron offers as a further motif for his
poem the following passage from Coleridge: “_And woman wailing for her
Demon lover_.” Byron’s poem is concerned with two great events, one
psychologic and one telluric; the passion which throws down all
barriers; and all the terrors of the unchained powers of nature: a
parallel which has already been introduced into our earlier discussion.
The angels Samiasa and Azaziel burn with sinful love for the beautiful
daughters of Cain, Anah and Aholibama, and force a way through the
barrier which is placed between mortal and immortal. They revolt as
Lucifer once did against God, and the archangel Raphael raises his voice
warningly:

           “But man hath listened to his voice
           And ye to woman’s—beautiful she is,
           The serpent’s voice less subtle than her kiss.
           The snake but vanquished dust; but she will draw
           A second host from heaven to break heaven’s law.”

The power of God is threatened by the seduction of passion; a second
fall of angels menaces heaven. Let us translate this mythologic
projection back into the psychologic, from whence it originated. Then it
would read: the power of the good and reasonable ruling the world wisely
is threatened by the chaotic primitive power of passion; therefore
passion must be exterminated; that is to say, projected into mythology.
The race of Cain and the whole sinful world must be destroyed from the
roots by the deluge. It is the inevitable result of that sinful passion
which has broken through all barriers. Its counterpart is the sea and
the waters of the deep and the floods of rain,[191] the generating,
fructifying and “maternal waters,” as the Indian mythology refers to
them. Now they leave their natural bounds and surge over the mountain
tops, engulfing all living things; for passion destroys itself. The
libido is God and Devil. With the destruction of the sinfulness of the
libido an essential portion of the libido would be destroyed. Through
the loss of the Devil, God himself suffered a considerable loss,
somewhat like an amputation upon the body of the Divinity. The
mysterious hint in Raphael’s lament concerning the two rebels, Samiasa
and Azaziel, suggests this.

                                          “... Why,
              Cannot this earth be made, or be destroyed,
              Without involving ever some vast void
              In the immortal ranks?...”

Love raises man, not only above himself, but also above the bounds of
his mortality and earthliness, up to divinity itself, and in the very
act of raising him it destroys him. Mythologically, this
self-presumption finds its striking expression in the building of the
heaven-high tower of Babel, which brings confusion to mankind.[192] In
Byron’s poem it is the sinful ambition of the race of Cain, for love of
which it makes even the stars subservient and leads away the sons of God
themselves. If, indeed, longing for the highest things—if I may speak
so—is legitimate, then it lies in the circumstances that it leaves its
human boundaries, that of sinfulness, and, therefore, destruction. The
longing of the moth for the star is not absolutely pure and transparent,
but glows in sultry mist, for man continues to be man. Through the
excess of his longing he draws down the divine into the corruption of
his passion;[193] therefore, he seems to raise himself to the Divine;
but with that his humanity is destroyed. Thus the love of Anah and
Aholibama for their angels becomes the ruin of gods and men. The
invocation with which Cain’s daughters implore their angels is
psychologically an exact parallel to Miss Miller’s poem.

     _Anah_:[194]

     Seraph!
     From thy sphere!
     Whatever star[195] contains thy glory.

     In the eternal depths of heaven
     Albeit thou watchest with the ‘seven,’
     Though through space infinite and hoary
     Before thy bright wings worlds will be driven,

               Yet hear!
     Oh! think of her who holds thee dear!

     And though she nothing is to thee,
     Yet think that thou art all to her.

            ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

     Eternity is in thy years,
     Unborn, undying beauty in thine eyes;
     With me thou canst not sympathize,
     Except in love, and there thou must
     Acknowledge that more loving dust
     Ne’er wept beneath the skies.
     Thou walkest thy many worlds,[196] thou seest
     The face of him who made thee great,
     As he hath made of me the least
     Of those cast out from Eden’s gate;

     Yet, Seraph, dear!
               Oh hear!
     For thou hast loved me, and I would not die
     Until I know what I must die in knowing,
     That thou forgettest in thine eternity
     Her whose heart death could not keep from o’erflowing
     For thee, immortal essence as thou art,[197]
     Great is their love who love in sin and fear;
     And such, I feel, are waging in my heart
     A war unworthy: to an Adamite
     Forgive, my Seraph! that such thoughts appear.
     For sorrow is our element....

            ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

         The hour is near
     Which tells me we are not abandoned quite.
         Appear! Appear!
         Seraph!
     My own Azaziel! be but here,
     And leave the stars to their own light.

     _Aholibama_:

     I call thee, I await thee and I love thee.

            ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

     Though I be formed of clay,
     And thou of beams[198]
     More bright than those of day on Eden’s streams,
     Thine immortality cannot repay
     With love more warm than mine
     My love. There is a ray[199]
     In me, which though forbidden yet to shine,
     I feel was lighted at thy God’s and mine.[200]
     It may be hidden long: death and decay
     Our mother Eve bequeathed us—but my heart
     Defies it: though this life must pass away,
     Is that a cause for thee and me to part?

            ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

     I can share all things, even immortal sorrow;
     For thou hast ventured to share life with me,
     And shall I shrink from thine eternity?
     No, though the serpent’s sting[201] should pierce me through,
     And thou thyself wert like the serpent, coil
     Around me still.[202] And I will smile
     And curse thee not, but hold
     Thee in as warm a fold
     As—but descend and prove
     A mortal’s love
     For an immortal....

The apparition of both angels which follows the invocation is, as
always, a shining vision of light.

               _Aholibama_:

               The clouds from off their pinions flinging
               As though they bore to-morrow’s light.

               _Anah_:

               But if our father see the sight!

               _Aholibama_:

               He would but deem it was the moon
               Rising unto some sorcerer’s tune
               An hour too soon.

                      ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

               _Anah_:

               Lo! They have kindled all the west,
               Like a returning sunset....
               On Ararat’s late secret crest
               A wild and many colored bow,
               The remnant of their flashing path,
               Now shines!...

At the sight of this many-colored vision of light, where both women are
entirely filled with desire and expectation, Anah makes use of a simile
full of presentiment, which suddenly allows us to look down once more
into the dismal dark depths, out of which for a moment the terrible
animal nature of the mild god of light emerges.

           “... and now, behold! it hath
           Returned to night, as rippling foam,
           Which the leviathan hath lashed
           From his unfathomable home,
           When sporting on the face of the calm deep,
           Subsides soon after he again hath dash’d
           Down, down to where the ocean’s fountains sleep.”

Thus like the leviathan! We recall this overpowering weight in the scale
of God’s justice in regard to the man Job. There, where the deep sources
of the ocean are, the leviathan lives; from there the all-destroying
flood ascends, the all-engulfing flood of animal passion. That stifling,
compressing feeling[203] of the onward-surging impulse is projected
mythologically as a flood which, rising up and over all, destroys all
that exists, in order to allow a new and better creation to come forth
from this destruction.

          _Japhet_:

          The eternal will
          Shall deign to expound this dream
          Of good and evil; and redeem
          Unto himself all times, all things;

          And, gather’d under his almighty wings,
          Abolish hell!
          And to the expiated Earth
          Restore the beauty of her birth.

          _Spirits_:

          And when shall take effect this wondrous spell?

          _Japhet_:

          When the Redeemer cometh; first in pain
          And then in glory.

          _Spirits_:

          New times, new climes, new arts, new men, but still
          The same old tears, old crimes, and oldest ill,
          Shall be amongst your race in different forms;
          But the same mortal storms
          Shall oversweep the future, as the waves
          In a few hours the glorious giants’ graves.

The prophetic visions of Japhet have almost prophetic meaning for our
poetess; with the death of the moth in the light, evil is once more laid
aside; the complex has once again, even if in a censored form, expressed
itself. With that, however, the problem is not solved; all sorrow and
every longing begins again from the beginning, but there is “Promise in
the Air”—the premonition of the Redeemer, of the “Well-beloved,” of the
Sun-hero, who again mounts to the height of the sun and again descends
to the coldness of the winter, who is the light of hope from race to
race, the image of the libido.




                                PART II




                               CHAPTER I
                         ASPECTS OF THE LIBIDO


Before I enter upon the contents of this second part, it seems necessary
to cast a backward glance over the singular train of thought which the
analysis of the poem “The Moth to the Sun” has produced. Although this
poem is very different from the foregoing Hymn of Creation, closer
investigation of the “longing for the sun” has carried us into the realm
of the fundamental ideas of religion and astral mythology, which ideas
are closely related to those considered in the first poem. The creative
God of the first poem, whose dual nature, moral and physical, was shown
especially clearly to us by Job, has in the second poem a new
qualification of astral-mythological, or, to express it better, of
astrological character. The God becomes the sun, and in this finds an
adequate natural expression quite apart from the moral division of the
God idea into the heavenly father and the devil. The sun is, as Renan
remarked, really the only rational representation of God, whether we
take the point of view of the barbarians of other ages or that of the
modern physical sciences. In both cases the sun is the parent God,
mythologically predominantly the Father God, from whom all living things
draw life; He is the fructifier and creator of all that lives, the
source of energy of our world. The discord into which the soul of man
has fallen through the action of moral laws[204] can be resolved into
complete harmony through the sun as the natural object which obeys no
human moral law. The sun is not only beneficial, but also destructive;
therefore the zodiacal representation of the August heat is the
herd-devouring lion whom the Jewish hero Samson[205] killed in order to
free the parched earth from this plague. Yet it is the harmonious and
inherent nature of the sun to scorch, and its scorching power seems
natural to men. It shines equally on the just and on the unjust, and
allows useful living objects to flourish as well as harmful ones.
Therefore, the sun is adapted as is nothing else to represent the
visible God of this world. That is to say, that driving strength of our
own soul, which we call libido, and whose nature it is to allow the
useful and injurious, the good and the bad to proceed. That this
comparison is no mere play of words is taught us by the mystics. When by
looking inwards (introversion) and going down into the depths of their
own being they find “in their heart” the image of the Sun, they find
their own love or libido, which with reason, I might say with physical
reason, is called the Sun; for our source of energy and life is the Sun.
Thus our life substance, as an energic process, is entirely Sun. Of what
special sort this “Sun energy” seen inwardly by the mystic is, is shown
by an example taken from the Hindoo mythology.[206] From the explanation
of Part III of the “Shvetâshvataropanishad” we take the following
quotation, which relates to the Rudra:[207]

  (2) “Yea, the one Rudra who all these worlds with ruling power doth
  rule, stands not for any second. Behind those that are born he stands;
  at ending time ingathers all the worlds he hath evolved, protector
  (he).

  (3) “He hath eyes on all sides, on all sides surely hath faces, arms
  surely on all sides, on all sides feet. With arms, with wings he
  tricks them out, creating heaven and earth, the only God.

  (4) “Who of the gods is both the source and growth, the Lord of all,
  the Rudra. Mighty seer; who brought the shining germ of old into
  existence—may he with reason pure conjoin us.”[208]

These attributes allow us clearly to discern the all-creator and in him
the Sun, which has wings and with a thousand eyes scans the world.[209]

The following passages confirm the text and join to it the idea most
important for us, that God is also contained in the individual creature:

  (7) “Beyond this (world) the Brahman beyond, the mighty one, in every
  creature hid according to its form, the one encircling Lord of all,
  Him having known, immortal they become.

  (8) “I know this mighty man, Sun-like, beyond the darkness, Him (and
  him) only knowing, one crosseth over death; no other path (at all) is
  there to go.

  (11) “... spread over the universe is He the Lord therefore as
  all-pervader, He’s benign.”

The powerful God, the equal of the Sun, is in that one, and whoever
knows him is immortal.[210] Going on further with the text, we come upon
a new attribute, which informs us in what form and manner Rudra lived in
men.

  (12) “The mighty monarch, He, the man, the one who doth the essence
  start towards that peace of perfect stainlessness, lordly, exhaustless
  light.

  (13) “The Man, the size of a thumb, the inner self, sits ever in the
  heart of all that’s born, by mind, mind ruling in the heart, is He
  revealed. That they who know, immortal they become.

  (14) “The Man of the thousands of heads (and) thousands of eyes (and)
  thousands of feet, covering the earth on all sides, He stands beyond,
  ten finger-breadths.

  (15) “The Man is verily this all, (both) what has been and what will
  be, Lord (too) of deathlessness which far all else surpasses.”

Important parallel quotations are to be found in the “Kathopanishad,”
section 2, part 4.

  (12) “The Man of the size of a thumb, resides in the midst within the
  self, of the past and the future, the Lord.

  (13) “The Man of the size of a thumb like flame free from smoke, of
  past and of future the Lord, the same is to-day, to-morrow the same
  will He be.”

Who this Tom-Thumb is can easily be divined—the phallic symbol of the
libido. The phallus is this hero dwarf, who performs great deeds; he,
this ugly god in homely form, who is the great doer of wonders, since he
is the visible expression of the creative strength incarnate in man.
This extraordinary contrast is also very striking in “Faust” (the mother
scene):

         _Mephistopheles_:

         I’ll praise thee ere we separate: I see
         Thou knowest the devil thoroughly:
         Here take this key.

         _Faust_:

         That little thing!

         _Mephistopheles_:

         Take hold of it, not undervaluing!

         _Faust_:

         It glows, it shines, increases in my hand!

         _Mephistopheles_:

         How much it is worth, thou soon shalt understand,
         The key will scent the true place from all others!
         Follow it down!—’twill lead thee to the Mothers![211]

Here the devil again puts into Faust’s hand the marvellous tool, a
phallic symbol of the libido, as once before in the beginning the devil,
in the form of the black dog, accompanied Faust, when he introduced
himself with the words:

                  “Part of that power, not understood,
        Which always wills the bad and always creates the good.”

United to this strength, Faust succeeded in accomplishing his real life
task, at first through evil adventure and then for the benefit of
humanity, for without the evil there is no creative power. Here in the
mysterious mother scene, where the poet unveils the last mystery of the
creative power to the initiated, Faust has need of the phallic magic
wand (in the magic strength of which he has at first no confidence), in
order to perform the greatest of wonders, namely, the creation of Paris
and Helen. With that Faust attains the divine power of working miracles,
and, indeed, only by means of this small, insignificant instrument. This
paradoxical impression seems to be very ancient, for even the Upanishads
could say the following of the dwarf god:

  (19) “Without hands, without feet, He moveth, He graspeth: Eyeless He
  seeth, (and) earless He heareth: He knoweth what is to be known, yet
  is there no knower of Him. Him call the first, mighty the Man.

  (20) “Smaller than small, (yet) greater than great in the heart of
  this creature the self doth repose ... etc.”

The phallus is the being, which moves without limbs, which sees without
eyes, which knows the future; and as symbolic representative of the
universal creative power existent everywhere immortality is vindicated
in it. It is always thought of as entirely independent, an idea current
not only in antiquity, but also apparent in the pornographic drawings of
our children and artists. It is a seer, an artist and a worker of
wonders; therefore it should not surprise us when certain phallic
characteristics are found again in the mythological seer, artist and
sorcerer. Hephaestus, Wieland the smith, and Mani, the founder of
Manicheism, whose followers were also famous, have crippled feet. The
ancient seer Melampus possessed a suggestive name (Blackfoot),[212] and
it seems also to be typical for seers to be blind. Dwarfed stature,
ugliness and deformity have become especially typical for those
mysterious chthonian gods, the sons of Hephaestus, the Cabiri,[213] to
whom great power to perform miracles was ascribed. The name signifies
“powerful,” and the Samothracian cult is most intimately united with
that of the ithyphallic Hermes, who, according to the account of
Herodotus, was brought to Attica by the Pelasgians. They are also called
μεγάλοι θεοί, the great gods. Their near relations are the “Idaean
dactyli” (finger or Idaean thumb),[214] to whom the mother of the gods
had taught the blacksmith’s art. (“The key will scent the true place
from all others! follow it down!—’twill lead thee to the Mothers!”) They
were the first leaders, the teachers of Orpheus, and invented the
Ephesian magic formulas and the musical rhythms.[215] The characteristic
disparity which is shown above in the Upanishad text, and in “Faust,” is
also found here, since the gigantic Hercules passed as an Idaean dactyl.

The colossal Phrygians, the skilled servants of Rhea,[216] were also
Dactyli. The Babylonian teacher of wisdom, Oannes,[217] was represented
in a phallic fish form.[218] The two sun heroes, the Dioscuri, stand in
relation to the Cabiri;[219] they also wear the remarkable pointed
head-covering (Pileus) which is peculiar to these mysterious gods,[220]
and which is perpetuated from that time on as a secret mark of
identification. Attis (the elder brother of Christ) wears the pointed
cap, just as does Mithra. It has also become traditional for our
present-day chthonian infantile gods,[221] the brownies (Penates), and
all the typical kind of dwarfs. Freud[222] has already called our
attention to the phallic meaning of the hat in modern phantasies. A
further significance is that probably the pointed cap represents the
foreskin. In order not to go too far afield from my theme, I must be
satisfied here merely to present the suggestion. But at a later
opportunity I shall return to this point with detailed proof.

The dwarf form leads to the figure of the divine boy, the _puer
eternus_, the young Dionysus, Jupiter Anxurus, Tages,[223] and so on. In
the vase painting of Thebes, already mentioned, a bearded Dionysus is
represented as ΚΑΒΕΙΡΟΣ, together with a figure of a boy as Παῖς,
followed by a caricatured boy’s figure designated as ΠΡΑΤΟΛΑΟΣ and then
again a caricatured man, which is represented as ΜΙΤΟΣ.[224] Μίτος
really means thread, but in orphic speech it stands for semen. It was
conjectured that this collection corresponded to a group of statuary in
the sanctuary of a cult. This supposition is supported by the history of
the cult as far as it is known; it is an original Phœnician cult of
father and son;[225] of an old and young Cabir who were more or less
assimilated with the Grecian gods. The double figures of the adult and
the child Dionysus lend themselves particularly to this assimilation.
One might also call this the cult of the large and small man. Now, under
various aspects, Dionysus is a phallic god in whose worship the phallus
held an important place; for example, in the cult of the Argivian
Bull—Dionysus. Moreover, the phallic herme of the god has given occasion
for a personification of the phallus of Dionysus, in the form of the god
Phales, who is nothing else but a Priapus. He is called ἑταῖρος or
σύγκωμος Βάκχου[226].[227] Corresponding to this state of affairs, one
cannot very well fail to recognize in the previously mentioned Cabiric
representation, and in the added boy’s figure, the picture of man and
his penis.[228] The previously mentioned paradox in the Upanishad text
of large and small, of giant and dwarf, is expressed more mildly here by
man and boy, or father and son.[229] The motive of deformity which is
used constantly by the Cabiric cult is present also in the vase picture,
while the parallel figures to Dionysus and Παῖς are the caricatured
Μίτος and Πρατόλαος. Just as formerly the difference in size gave
occasion for division, so does the deformity here.[230]

Without first bringing further proof to bear, I may remark that from
this knowledge especially strong sidelights are thrown upon the original
psychologic meaning of the religious heroes. Dionysus stands in an
intimate relation with the psychology of the early Asiatic God who died
and rose again from the dead and whose manifold manifestations have been
brought together in the figure of Christ into a firm personality
enduring for centuries. We gain from our premise the knowledge that
these heroes, as well as their typical fates, are personifications of
the human libido and its typical fates. They are imagery, like the
figures of our nightly dreams—the actors and interpreters of our secret
thoughts. And since we, in the present day, have the power to decipher
the symbolism of dreams and thereby surmise the mysterious psychologic
history of development of the individual, so a way is here opened to the
understanding of the secret springs of impulse beneath the psychologic
development of races. Our previous trains of thought, which demonstrate
the phallic side of the symbolism of the libido, also show how
thoroughly justified is the term “libido.”[231] Originally taken from
the sexual sphere, this word has become the most frequent technical
expression of psychoanalysis, for the simple reason that its
significance is wide enough to cover all the unknown and countless
manifestations of the Will in the sense of Schopenhauer. It is
sufficiently comprehensive and rich in meaning to characterize the real
nature of the psychical entity which it includes. The exact classical
significance of the word libido qualifies it as an entirely appropriate
term. Libido is taken in a very wide sense in Cicero:[232]

  “(Volunt ex duobus opinatis) bonis (nasci) Libidinem et Lætitiam; ut
  sit lætitia præsentium bonorum: libido futurorum.—Lætitia autem et
  Libido in bonorum opinione versantur, cum Libido ad id, quod videtur
  bonum, illecta et inflammata rapiatur.—Natura enim omnes ea, quæ bona
  videntur, sequuntur, fugiuntque contraria. Quamobrem simul objecta
  species cuiuspiam est, quod bonum videatur, ad id adipiscendum
  impellit ipsa natura. Id cum constanter prudenterque fit, ejusmodi
  appetitionem stoici βούλησιν appellant, nos appellamus voluntatem; eam
  illi putant in solo esse sapiente, quam sic definiunt; voluntas est
  quæ quid cum ratione desiderat: quæ autem ratione adversa incitata est
  vehementius, ea libido est, vel cupiditas effrenata, quæ in omnibus
  stultis invenitur.”[233]

The meaning of libido here is “to wish,” and in the stoical distinction
of will, dissolute desire. Cicero[234] used “libido” in a corresponding
sense:

            “Agere rem aliquam libidine, non ratione.”[235]

In the same sense Sallust says:

                    “Iracundia pars est libidinis.”

In another place in a milder and more general sense, which completely
approaches the analytical use:

  “Magisque in decoris armis et militaribus equis, quam in scortis et
  conviviis libidinem habebant.”[235]

Also:

             “Quod si tibi bona libido fuerit patriæ, etc.”

The use of libido is so general that the phrase “libido est scire”
merely had the significance of “I will, it pleases me.” In the phrase
“aliquam libido urinæ lacessit” libido had the meaning of urgency. The
significance of sexual desire is also present in the classics.

This general classical application of the conception agrees with the
corresponding etymological context of the word, _libido_ or _lubido_
(with _libet_, more ancient _lubet_), it pleases me, and _libens_ or
_lubens_ = gladly, willingly. Sanskrit, _lúbhyati_ = to experience
violent longing, _lôbhayati_ = excites longing, _lubdha-h_ = eager,
_lôbha-h_ = longing, eagerness. Gothic = _liufs_, and Old High German
_liob_ = love. Moreover, in Gothic, _lubains_ was represented as hope;
and Old High German, _lobôn_ = to praise, _lob_ = commendation, praise,
glory; Old Bulgarian, _ljubiti_ = to love, _ljuby_ = love; Lithuanian,
_liáupsinti_ = to praise.[236] It can be said that the conception of
libido as developed in the new work of Freud and of his school has
functionally the same significance in the biological territory as has
the conception of energy since the time of Robert Mayer in the physical
realm.[237] It may not be superfluous to say something more at this
point concerning the conception of libido after we have followed the
formation of its symbol to its highest expression in the human form of
the religious hero.




                               CHAPTER II
            THE CONCEPTION AND THE GENETIC THEORY OF LIBIDO


The chief source of the history of the analytic conception of libido is
Freud’s “Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory.” There the term
libido is conceived by him in the original narrow sense of sexual
impulse, sexual need. Experience forces us to the assumption of a
capacity for displacement of the libido, because functions or
localizations of non-sexual force are undoubtedly capable of taking up a
certain amount of libidinous sexual impetus, a libidinous afflux.[238]
Functions or objects could, therefore, obtain sexual value, which under
normal circumstances really have nothing to do with sexuality.[239] From
this fact results the Freudian comparison of the libido with a stream,
which is divisible, which can be dammed up, which overflows into
branches, and so on.[240] Freud’s original conception does not interpret
“everything sexual,” although this has been asserted by critics, but
recognizes the existence of certain forces, the nature of which are not
well known; to which Freud, however, compelled by the notorious facts
which are evident to any layman, grants the capacity to receive
“affluxes of libido.” The hypothetical idea at the basis is the symbol
of the “Triebbündel”[241] (bundle of impulses), wherein the sexual
impulse figures as a partial impulse of the whole system, and its
encroachment into the other realms of impulse is a fact of experience.
The theory of Freud, branching off from this interpretation, according
to which the motor forces of a neurotic system correspond precisely to
their libidinous additions to other (non-sexual) functional impulses,
has been sufficiently proven as correct, it seems to me, by the work of
Freud and his school.[242] Since the appearance of the “Three
Contributions,” in 1905, a change has taken place[243] in the libido
conception; its field of application has been widened. An extremely
clear example of this amplification is this present work. However, I
must state that Freud, as well as myself, saw the need of widening the
conception of libido. It was paranoia, so closely related to dementia
præcox, which seemed to compel Freud to enlarge the earlier limits of
the conception. The passage in question, which I will quote here, word
for word, reads:[244]

  “A third consideration which presents itself, in regard to the views
  developed here, starts the query as to whether we should accept as
  sufficiently effectual the universal receding of the libido from the
  outer world, in order to interpret from that, the end of the world: or
  whether in this case, the firmly rooted possession of the ‘I’ must not
  suffice to uphold the rapport with the outer world. Then one must
  either let that which we call possession of the libido (interest from
  erotic sources) coincide with interest in general, or else take into
  consideration the possibility that great disturbance in the
  disposition of the libido can also induce a corresponding disturbance
  in the possession of the ‘I.’ Now, these are the problems, which we
  are still absolutely helpless and unfitted to answer. Things would be
  different could we proceed from a safe fund of knowledge of instinct.
  But the truth is, we have nothing of that kind at our disposal. We
  understand instinct as the resultant of the reaction of the somatic
  and the psychic. We see in it the psychical representation of organic
  forces and take the popular distinction between the ‘I’ impulse and
  the sexual impulse, which appears to us to be in accord with the
  biological double rôle of the individual being who aspires to his own
  preservation as well as to the preservation of the species. But
  anything beyond this is a structure, which we set up, and also
  willingly let fall again in order to orient ourselves in the confusion
  of the dark processes of the soul; we expect particularly, from the
  psychoanalytic investigations into diseased soul processes, to have
  certain decisions forced upon us in regard to questions of the theory
  of instinct. This expectation has not yet been fulfilled on account of
  the still immature and limited investigations in these fields. At
  present the possibility of the reaction of libido disturbance upon the
  possession of the ‘I’ can be shown as little as the reverse; the
  secondary or induced disturbances of the libido processes through
  abnormal changes in the ‘I.’ It is probable that processes of this
  sort form the distinctive character of the psychoses. The conclusions
  arising from this, in relation to paranoia, are at present uncertain.
  One cannot assert that the paranoiac has completely withdrawn his
  interest from the outer world, nor withdrawn into the heights of
  repression, as one sometimes sees in certain other forms of
  hallucinatory psychoses. He takes notice of the outer world, he takes
  account of its changes, he is stirred to explanations by their
  influence, and therefore I consider it highly probable that the
  changed relation to the world is to be explained, wholly or in great
  part, by the deficiency of the libido interest.”

In this passage Freud plainly touches upon the question whether the
well-known longing for reality of the paranoic dement (and the dementia
præcox patients),[245] to whom I have especially called attention in my
book, “The Psychology of Dementia Præcox,”[246] is to be traced back to
the withdrawal of the “libidinous affluxes” alone, or whether this
coincides with the so-called objective interest in general. It is hardly
to be assumed that the normal “fonction du réel” (Janet)[247] is
maintained only through affluxes of libido or erotic interest. The fact
is that in very many cases reality disappears entirely, so that not a
trace of psychological adaptation or orientation can be recognized.
Reality is repressed under these circumstances and replaced by the
contents of the complex. One must of necessity say that not only the
erotic interest but the interest in general has disappeared, that is to
say, the whole adaptation to reality has ceased. To this category belong
the stuporose and catatonic automatons.

I have previously made use of the expression “psychic energy” in my
“Psychology of Dementia Præcox” because I was unable to establish the
theory of this psychosis upon the conception of the displacement of the
affluxes of libido. My experience, at that time chiefly psychiatric, did
not enable me to understand this theory. However, the correctness of
this theory in regard to neuroses, strictly speaking the transference
neuroses, was proven to me later after increased experience in the field
of hysteria and compulsion neuroses. In the territory of these neuroses
it is mainly a question whether any portion of the libido which is
spared through the specific repression becomes introverted and
regressive into earlier paths of transference; for example, the path of
the parental transference.[248] With that, however, the former
non-sexual psychologic adaptation to the environment remains preserved
so far as it does not concern the erotic and its secondary positions
(symptoms). The reality which is lacking to the patients is just that
portion of the libido to be found in the neurosis. In dementia præcox,
on the contrary, not merely that portion of libido which is saved in the
well-known specific sexual repression is lacking for reality, but much
more than one could write down to the account of sexuality in a strict
sense. The function of reality is lacking to such a degree that even the
motive power must be encroached upon in the loss. The sexual character
of this must be disputed absolutely,[249] for reality is not understood
to be a sexual function. Moreover, if that were so, the introversion of
the libido in the strict sense must have as a result a loss of reality
in the neuroses, and, indeed, a loss which could be compared with that
of dementia præcox. These facts have rendered it impossible for me to
transfer Freud’s theory of libido to dementia præcox, and, therefore, I
am of the opinion that Abraham’s investigation[250] is hardly tenable
theoretically, from the standpoint of the Freudian theory of libido. If
Abraham believes that through the withdrawal of the libido from the
outer world the paranoid system or the schizophrenic symptomatology
results, then this assumption is not justified from the standpoint of
the knowledge of that time, because a mere libido introversion and
regression leads, speedily, as Freud has clearly shown, into the
neuroses, and, strictly speaking, into the transference neuroses, and
not into dementia præcox. Therefore, the transference of the libido
theory to dementia præcox is impossible, because this illness produces a
loss of reality which cannot be explained by the deficiency of the
libido defined in this narrow sense.

It affords me especial satisfaction that our teacher also, when he laid
his hand on the delicate material of the paranoic psychology, was forced
to doubt the applicability of the conception of libido held by him at
that time. The sexual definition of this did not permit me to understand
those disturbances of function, which affect the vague territory of the
hunger instinct just as much as that of the sexual instinct. For a long
time the theory of libido seemed to me inapplicable to dementia præcox.
With increasing experience in analytical work, however, I became aware
of a gradual change in my conception of libido. In place of the
descriptive definition of the “Three Contributions” there gradually grew
up a generic definition of the libido, which rendered it possible for me
to replace the expression “psychic energy” by the term “libido.” I was
forced to ask myself whether indeed the function of reality to-day does
not consist only in its smaller part of libido sexualis and in the
greater part of other impulses? It is still a very important question
whether phylogenetically the function of reality is not, at least in
great part, of sexual origin. To answer this question directly in regard
to the function of reality is not possible, but we shall attempt to come
to an understanding indirectly.

A fleeting glance at the history of evolution is sufficient to teach
us that countless complicated functions to which to-day must be
denied any sexual character were originally pure derivations from
the general impulse of propagation. During the ascent through the
animal kingdom an important displacement in the fundamentals of the
procreative instinct has taken place. The mass of the reproductive
products with the uncertainty of fertilization has more and more
been replaced by a controlled impregnation and an effective
protection of the offspring. In this way part of the energy required
in the production of eggs and sperma has been transposed into the
creation of mechanisms for allurement and for protection of the
young. Thus we discover the first instincts of art in animals used
in the service of the impulse of creation, and limited to the
breeding season. The original sexual character of these biological
institutions became lost in their organic fixation and functional
independence. Even if there can be no doubt about the sexual origin
of music, still it would be a poor, unæsthetic generalization if one
were to include music in the category of sexuality. A similar
nomenclature would then lead us to classify the cathedral of Cologne
as mineralogy because it is built of stones. It can be a surprise
only to those to whom the history of evolution is unknown to find
how few things there really are in human life which cannot be
reduced in the last analysis to the instinct of procreation. It
includes very nearly everything, I think, which is beloved and dear
to us. We spoke just now of libido as the creative impulse and at
the same time we allied ourselves with the conception which opposes
libido to hunger in the same way that the instinct of the
preservation of the species is opposed to the instinct of
self-preservation. In nature, this artificial distinction does not
exist. Here we see only a continuous life impulse, a will to live
which will attain the creation of the whole species through the
preservation of the individual. Thus far this conception coincides
with the idea of the Will in Schopenhauer, for we can conceive Will
objectively, only as a manifestation of an internal desire. This
throwing of psychological perceptions into material reality is
characterized philosophically as “introjection.” (Ferenczi’s
conception of “introjection” denoted the reverse, that is, the
taking of the outer world into the inner world.)[251] Naturally, the
conception of the world was distorted by introjection. Freud’s
conception of the principle of desire is a voluntary formulation of
the idea of introjection, while his once more voluntarily conceived
“principle of reality” corresponds functionally to that which I
designate as “corrective of reality,” and R. Avenarius[252]
designates as “empiriokritische Prinzipialkoordination.” The
conception of power owes its existence to this very introjection;
this has already been said expressively by Galileo in his remark
that its origin is to be sought in the subjective perception of the
muscular power of the individual. Because we have already arrived at
the daring assumption that the libido, which was employed originally
in the exclusive service of egg and seed production, now appears
firmly organized in the function of nest-building, and can no longer
be employed otherwise; similarly this conception forces us to relate
it to every desire, including hunger. For now we can no longer make
any essential distinction between the will to build a nest and the
will to eat. This view brings us to a conception of libido, which
extends over the boundaries of the physical sciences into a
philosophical aspect—to a conception of the will in general. I must
give this bit of psychological “Voluntarismus” into the hands of the
philosophers for them to manage. For the rest I refer to the words
of Schopenhauer[253] relating to this. In connection with the
psychology of this conception (by which I understand neither
metapsychology nor metaphysics) I am reminded here of the cosmogenic
meaning of Eros in Plato and Hesiod,[254] and also of the orphic
figure of Phanes, the “_shining one_,” the first created, the
“father of Eros.” Phanes has also orphically the significance of
Priapus; he is a god of love, bisexual and similar to the Theban
Dionysus Lysios.[255] The orphic meaning of Phanes is similar to
that of the Indian Kâma, the god of love, which is also the
cosmogenic principle. To Plotinus, of the Neo-Platonic school, the
world-soul is the energy of the intellect.[256] Plotinus compares
“The One,” the creative primal principle, with light in general; the
intellect with the Sun (♂), the world-soul with the moon (♀). In
another comparison Plotinus compares “The One” with the Father, the
intellect with the Son.[257] The “One” designated as Uranus is
transcendent. The son as Kronos has dominion over the visible world.
The world-soul (designated as Zeus) appears as subordinate to him.
The “One,” or the Usia of the whole existence is designated by
Plotinus as hypostatic, also as the three forms of emanation, also
μία οὐσία ἐν τρισὶν ὑποστάσεσιν.[258] As Drews observed, this is
also the formula of the Christian Trinity (God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost) as it was decided upon at the councils
of Nicea and Constantinople.[259] It may also be noticed that
certain early Christian sectarians attributed a maternal
significance to the Holy Ghost (world-soul, moon). (See what follows
concerning Chi of Timæus.) According to Plotinus, the world-soul has
a tendency toward a divided existence and towards divisibility, the
_conditio sine qua non_ of all change, creation and procreation
(also a maternal quality). It is an “unending all of life” and
wholly energy; it is a living organism of ideas, which attain in it
effectiveness and reality.[260] The intellect is its procreator, its
father, which, having conceived it, brings it to development in
thought.[261]

  “What lies enclosed in the intellect, comes to development in the
  world-soul as logos, fills it with meaning and makes it as if
  intoxicated with nectar.”[262]

Nectar is analogous to soma, the drink of fertility and of life, also to
sperma. The soul is fructified by the intellect; as oversoul it is
called heavenly Aphrodite, as the undersoul the earthly Aphrodite. “It
knows the birth pangs,”[263] and so on. The bird of Aphrodite, the dove,
is not without good cause the symbol of the Holy Ghost.

This fragment of the history of philosophy, which may easily be
enlarged, shows the significance of the endopsychic perception of the
libido and of its symbolism in human thought.

In the diversity of natural phenomena we see the desire, the libido, in
the most diverse applications and forms. We see the libido in the stage
of childhood almost wholly occupied in the instinct of nutrition, which
takes care of the upbuilding of the body. With the development of the
body there are successively opened new spheres of application for the
libido. The last sphere of application, and surpassing all the others in
its functional significance, is sexuality, which seems at first almost
bound up with the function of nutrition. (Compare with this the
influence on procreation of the conditions of nutrition in lower animals
and plants.) In the territory of sexuality, the libido wins that
formation, the enormous importance of which has justified us in the use
of the term libido in general. Here the libido appears very properly as
an impulse of procreation, and almost in the form of an undifferentiated
sexual primal libido, as an energy of growth, which clearly forces the
individual towards division, budding, etc. (The clearest distinction
between the two forms of libido is to be found among those animals in
whom the stage of nutrition is separated from the sexual stage by a
chrysalis stage.)

From that sexual primal libido which produced millions of eggs and seeds
from one small creature derivatives have been developed with the great
limitation of the fecundity; derivatives in which the functions are
maintained by a special differentiated libido. This differentiated
libido is henceforth desexualized because it is dissociated from its
original function of egg and sperma production; nor is there any
possibility of restoring it to its original function. Thus, in general,
the process of development consists in an increasing transformation of
the primal libido which only produced products of generation to the
secondary functions of allurement and protection of the young. This now
presupposes a very different and very complicated relation to reality, a
true function of reality, which, functionally inseparable, is bound up
with the needs of procreation. Thus the altered mode of procreation
carries with it as a correlate a correspondingly heightened adaptation
to reality.[264]

In this way we attain an insight into certain primitive conditions of
the function of reality. It would be radically wrong to say that its
compelling power is a sexual one. It was a sexual one to a large extent.
The process of transformation of the primal libido into secondary
impulses always took place in the form of affluxes of sexual libido,
that is to say, sexuality became deflected from its original destination
and a portion of it turned, little by little, increasing in amount, into
the phylogenetic impulse of the mechanisms of allurement and of
protection of the young. This diversion of the sexual libido from the
sexual territory into associated functions is still taking place.[265]
Where this operation succeeds without injury to the adaptation of the
individual it is called _sublimation_. Where the attempt does not
succeed it is called _repression_.

The descriptive standpoint of psychology accepts the multiplicity of
instincts, among which is the sexual instinct, as a special phenomenon;
moreover, it recognizes certain affluxes of libido to non-sexual
instincts.

Quite otherwise is the genetic standpoint. It regards the multiplicity
of instincts as issuing from a relative unity, the primal libido;[266]
it recognizes that definite amounts of the primal libido are split off,
as it were, associated with the newly formed functions and finally
merged in them. As a result of this it is impossible, from the genetic
standpoint, to hold to the strictly limited conception of libido of the
descriptive standpoint; it leads inevitably to a broadening of the
conception. With this we come to the theory of libido that I have
surreptitiously introduced into the first part of this work for the
purpose of making this genetic conception familiar to the reader. The
explanation of this harmless deceit I have saved until the second part.

For the first time, through this genetic idea of libido, which in every
way surpasses the descriptive sexual, the transference was made possible
of the Freudian libido theory into the psychology of mental disease. The
passage quoted above shows how the present Freudian conception of libido
collides with the problem of the psychoses.[267] Therefore, when I speak
of libido, I associate with it the genetic conception which contains not
only the immediate sexual but also an amount of desexualized primal
libido. When I say a sick person takes his libido away from the outer
world, in order to take possession of the inner world with it, I do not
mean that he takes away merely the affluxes from the function of
reality, but he takes energy away, according to my view, from those
desexualized instincts which regularly and properly support the function
of reality.

With this alteration in the libido conception, certain parts of our
terminology need revision as well. As we know, Abraham has undertaken
the experiment of transferring the Freudian libido theory to dementia
præcox and has conceived the characteristic lack of rapport and the
cessation of the function of reality as autoerotism. This conception
needs revision. Hysterical introversion of the libido leads to
autoerotism, since the patient’s erotic afflux of libido designed for
the function of adaptation is introverted, whereby his ego is occupied
by the corresponding amount of erotic libido. The schizophrenic,
however, shuns reality far more than merely the erotic afflux would
account for; therefore, his inner condition is very different from that
of the hysteric. He is more than autoerotic, he builds up an
intra-psychic equivalent for reality, for which purpose he has
necessarily to employ other dynamics than that afforded by the erotic
afflux. Therefore, I must grant to Bleuler the right to reject the
conception of autoerotism, taken from the study of hysterical neuroses,
and there legitimate, and to replace it by the conception of
autismus.[268] I am forced to say that this term is better fitted to
facts than autoerotism. With this I acknowledge my earlier idea of the
identity of autismus (Bleuler) and autoerotism (Freud) as unjustified,
and, therefore, retract it.[269] This thorough revision of the
conception of libido has compelled me to this.

From these considerations it follows necessarily that the descriptive
psychologic conception of libido must be given up in order for the
libido theory to be applied to dementia præcox. That it is there
applicable is best shown in Freud’s brilliant investigation of
Schreber’s phantasies. The question now is whether this genetic
conception of libido proposed by me is suitable for the neuroses. I
believe that this question may be answered affirmatively. “Natura non
fecit saltum”—it is not merely to be expected but it is also probable
that at least temporary functional disturbances of various degrees
appear in the neuroses, which transcend the boundaries of the immediate
sexual; in any case, this occurs in psychotic episodes. I consider the
broadening of the conception of libido which has developed through the
most recent analytic work as a real advance which will prove of especial
advantage in the important field of the introversion psychoses. Proofs
of the correctness of my assumption are already at hand. It has become
apparent through a series of researches of the Zurich School, which are
now published in part,[270] that the phantastic substitution products
which take the place of the disturbed function of reality bear
unmistakable traces of archaic thought. This confirmation is parallel to
the postulate asserted above, according to which reality is deprived,
not merely of an immediate (individual) amount of libido, but also of an
already differentiated or desexualized quantity of libido, which, among
normal people, has belonged to the function of reality ever since
prehistoric times. _A dropping away of the last acquisition of the
function of reality (or adaptation) must of necessity be replaced by an
earlier mode of adaptation._ We find this principle already in the
doctrines of the neuroses, that is, that a repression resulting from the
failure of the recent transference is replaced by an old way of
transference, namely, through a regressive revival of the parent imago.
In the transference neurosis (hysterical), where merely a part of the
_immediate sexual_ libido is taken away from reality by the specific
sexual repression, the substituted product is a phantasy of individual
origin and significance, with only a trace of those archaic traits found
in the phantasies of those mental disorders in which a portion of the
general human function of reality organized since antiquity has broken
off. This portion can be replaced only by a generally valid archaic
surrogate. We owe a simple and clear example of this proposition to the
investigation of Honegger.[271] A paranoic of good intelligence who has
a clear idea of the spherical form of the earth and its rotation around
the sun replaces the modern astronomical views by a system worked out in
great detail, which one must call archaic, in which the earth is a flat
disc over which the sun travels.[272] (I am reminded of the sun-phallus
mentioned in the first part of this book, for which we are also indebted
to Honegger.) Spielrein has likewise furnished some very interesting
examples of archaic definitions which begin in certain illnesses to
overlay the real meanings of the modern word. For example, Spielrein’s
patient had correctly discovered the mythological significance of
alcohol, the intoxicating drink, to be “an effusion of seed.”[273] She
also had a symbolism of boiling which I must place parallel to the
especially important alchemistic vision of Zosimos,[274] who found
people in boiling water within the cavity of the altar.[275] This
patient used earth in place of mother, and also water to express
mother.[276] I refrain from further examples because future work of the
Zurich School will furnish abundant evidence of this sort.


My foregoing proposition of the replacement of the disturbed function of
reality by an archaic surrogate is supported by an excellent paradox of
Spielrein’s. She says: “I often had the illusion that these patients
might be simply victims of a folk superstition.” As a matter of fact,
patients substitute phantasies for reality, phantasies similar to the
actually incorrect mental products of the past, which, however, were
once the view of reality. As the Zosimos vision shows, the old
superstitions were symbols[277] which permitted transitions to the most
remote territory. This must have been very expedient for certain archaic
periods, for by this means convenient bridges were offered to lead a
partial amount of libido over into the mental realm. Evidently Spielrein
thinks of a similar biological meaning of the symbols when she
says:[278]

  “Thus a symbol seems to me to owe its origin in general to the
  tendency of a complex for dissolution in the common totality of
  thought.... The complex is robbed by that of the personal element....
  This tendency towards dissolution (transformation) of every individual
  complex is the motive for poetry, painting, for every sort of art.”

When here we replace the formal conception “complex” by the conception
of the quantity of libido (the total effect of the complex), which, from
the standpoint of the libido theory, is a justified measure, then does
Spielrein’s view easily agree with mine. When primitive man understands
in general what an act of generation is, then, according to the
principle of the path of least resistance, he never can arrive at the
idea of replacing the generative organs by a sword-blade or a shuttle;
but this is the case with certain Indians, who explain the origin of
mankind by the union of the two transference symbols. He then must be
compelled to devise an analogous thing in order to bring a manifest
sexual interest upon an asexual expression. The propelling motive of
this transition of the _immediate sexual_ libido to the non-sexual
representation can, in my opinion, be found only in a _resistance which
opposes primitive sexuality_.

It appears as if, by this means of phantastic analogy formation, more
libido would gradually become desexualized, because increasingly more
phantasy correlates were put in the place of the primitive achievement
of the sexual libido. With this an enormous broadening of the world idea
was gradually developed because new objects were always assimilated as
sexual symbols. It is a question whether the human consciousness has not
been brought to its present state entirely or in great part in this
manner. It is evident, in any case, that an important significance in
the development of the human mind is due to the impulse towards the
discovery of analogy. We must agree thoroughly with Steinthal when he
says that an absolutely overweening importance must be granted to the
little phrase “Gleich wie” (even as) in the history of the development
of thought. It is easy to believe that the carryover of the libido to a
phantastic correlate has led primitive man to a number of the most
important discoveries.




                              CHAPTER III
 THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE LIBIDO. A POSSIBLE SOURCE OF PRIMITIVE HUMAN
                              DISCOVERIES


In the following pages I will endeavor to picture a concrete example of
the transition of the libido. I once treated a patient who suffered from
a depressive catatonic condition. The case was one of only a slight
introversion psychosis; therefore, the existence of many hysterical
features was not surprising. In the beginning of the analytic treatment,
while telling of a very painful occurrence she fell into a
hysterical-dreamy state, in which she showed all signs of sexual
excitement. For obvious reasons she lost the knowledge of my presence
during this condition. The excitement led to a masturbative act (frictio
femorum). This act was accompanied by a peculiar gesture. She made a
very _violent rotary motion_ with the forefinger of the left hand on the
left temple, as if she were boring a hole there. Afterwards there was
complete amnesia for what had happened, and there was nothing to be
learned about the queer gesture with her hand. Although this act can
easily be likened to a boring into the mouth, nose or ear, now
transferred to the temple, it belongs in the territory of infantile
ludus sexualis[279]—to the preliminary exercise preparatory to sexual
activity. Without really understanding it, this gesture, nevertheless,
seemed very important to me. Many weeks later I had an opportunity to
speak to the patient’s mother, and from her I learned that her daughter
had been a very exceptional child. When only two years old she would sit
with her back to an open cupboard door for hours and rhythmically beat
her head against the door[280]—to the distraction of the household. A
little later, instead of playing as other children, she began to bore a
hole with her finger in the plaster of the wall of the house. She did
this with little turning and scraping movements, and kept herself busy
at this occupation for hours. She was a complete puzzle to her parents.
From her fourth year she practised onanism. It is evident that in this
early infantile activity the preliminary stage of the later trouble may
be found. The especially remarkable features in this case are, first,
that the child did not carry out the action on its own body, and,
secondly, the assiduity with which it carried on the action.[281] One is
tempted to bring these two facts into a causal relationship and to say,
because the child does not accomplish this action on her own body,
perhaps that is the reason of the assiduity, for by boring into the wall
she never arrives at the same satisfaction as if she executed the
activity onanistically on her own body.

The very evident onanistic boring of the patient can be traced back to a
very early stage of childhood, which is prior to the period of local
onanism. That time is still psychologically very obscure, because
individual reproductions and memories are lacking to a great extent, the
same as among animals. The race characteristics (manner of life)
predominate during the entire life of the animal, whereas among men the
individual character asserts itself over the race type. Granting the
correctness of this remark, we are struck with the apparently wholly
incomprehensible individual activity of this child at this early age. We
learn from her later life history that her development, which is, as is
always the case, intimately interwoven with parallel external events,
has led to that mental disturbance which is especially well known on
account of its individuality and the originality of its productions, i.
e. dementia præcox. The peculiarity of this disturbance, as we have
pointed out above, depends upon the predominance of the phantastic form
of thought—of the infantile in general. From this type of thinking
proceed all those numerous contacts with mythological products, and that
which we consider as original and wholly individual creations are very
often creations which are comparable with nothing but those of
antiquity. I believe that this comparison can be applied to all
formations of this remarkable illness, and perhaps also to this special
symptom of boring. We have already seen that the onanistic boring of the
patient dated from a very early stage of childhood, that is to say, it
was reproduced from that period of the past. The sick woman fell back
for the first time into the early onanism only after she had been
married many years, and following the death of her child, with whom she
had identified herself through an overindulgent love. When the child
died the still healthy mother was overcome by early infantile symptoms
in the form of scarcely concealed fits of masturbation, which were
associated with this very act of boring. As already observed, the
primary boring appeared at a time which preceded the infantile onanism
localized in the genitals. This fact is of significance in so far as
this boring differs thereby from a similar later practice which appeared
after the genital onanism. The later bad habits represent, as a rule, a
substitution for repressed genital masturbation, or for an attempt in
this direction. As such these habits (finger-sucking, biting the nails,
picking at things, boring into the ears and nose, etc.) may persist far
into adult life as regular symptoms of a repressed amount of libido.

As has already been shown above, the libido in youthful individuals at
first manifests itself in the nutritional zone, when food is taken in
the act of suckling with rhythmic movements and with every sign of
satisfaction. With the growth of the individual and the development of
his organs the libido creates for itself new avenues to supply its need
of activity and satisfaction. The primary model of rhythmic activity,
producing pleasure and satisfaction, must now be transferred to the zone
of other functions, with sexuality as its final goal. A considerable
part of the “hunger libido” is transferred into the “sexual libido.”
This transition does not take place suddenly at the time of puberty, as
is generally supposed, but very gradually in the course of the greater
part of childhood. The libido can free itself only with difficulty and
very slowly from that which is peculiar to the function of nutrition, in
order to enter into the peculiarity of the sexual function. Two periods
are to be distinguished in this state of transition, so far as I can
judge—_the epoch of suckling and the epoch of the displaced rhythmic
activity_. Suckling still belongs to the function of nutrition, but
passes beyond it, however, in that it is no longer the function of
nutrition, but rhythmic activity, with pleasure and satisfaction as a
goal, without the taking of nourishment. Here the hand enters as an
auxiliary organ. In the period of the displaced rhythmic activity the
hand appears still more clearly as an auxiliary organ; the gaining of
pleasure leaves the mouth zone and turns to other regions. The
possibilities are now many. As a rule, other openings of the body become
the objects of the libido interest; then the skin, and special portions
of that. The activity expressed in these parts, which can appear as
rubbing, boring, picking, and so on, follows a certain rhythm and serves
to produce pleasure. After longer or shorter tarryings of the libido at
these stations, it passes onward until it reaches the sexual zone, and
there, for the first time, can be occasion for the beginning of
onanistic attempts. In its migration the libido takes more than a little
of the function of nutrition with it into the sexual zone, which readily
accounts for the numerous and innate correlations between the functions
of nutrition and sexuality. If, after the occupation of the sexual zone,
an obstacle arises against the present form of application of the
libido, then there occurs, according to the well-known laws, a
regression to the nearest station lying behind, to the two
above-mentioned periods. It is now of special importance that the epoch
of the displaced rhythmic activity coincides in a general way with the
time of the development of the mind and of speech. I might designate the
period from birth until the occupation of the sexual zone as the
presexual stage of development. This generally occurs between the third
and fifth year, and is comparable to the chrysalis stage in butterflies.
It is distinguished by the irregular commingling of the elements of
nutrition and of sexual functions. Certain regressions follow directly
back to the presexual stage, and, judging from my experience, this seems
to be the rule in the regression of dementia præcox. I will give two
brief examples. One case concerns a young girl who developed a catatonic
state during her engagement. When she saw me for the first time, she
came up suddenly, embraced me, and said, “Papa, give me something to
eat.” The other case concerns a young maidservant who complained that
people pursued her with electricity and that this caused a queer feeling
in her genitals, “as if it ate and drank down there.”

These regressive phenomena show that even from the distance of the
modern mind those early stages of the libido can be regressively
reached. One may assume, therefore, that in the earliest states of human
development this road was much more easily travelled than it is to-day.
It becomes then a matter of great interest to learn whether traces of
this have been preserved in history.

We owe our knowledge of the ethnologic phantasy of boring to the
valuable work of Abraham,[282] who also refers us to the writings of
Adalbert Kuhn.[283] Through this investigation we learn that Prometheus,
the fire-bringer, may be a brother of the Hindoo Pramantha, that is to
say, of the masculine fire-rubbing piece of wood. The Hindoo
fire-bringer is called Mâtariçvan, and the activity of the fire
preparation is always designated in the hieratic text by the verb
“manthâmi,”[284] which means _shaking_, _rubbing_, _bringing forth by
rubbing_. Kuhn has put this verb in connection with the Greek μανθάνω,
which means “to learn,” and has explained this conceptual
relationship.[285] The “tertium comparationis” might lie in the rhythm,
the movement to and fro in the mind. According to Kuhn, the root “manth”
or “math” must be traced from μανθάνω (μάθημα, μάθησις) to προ-μηθέομαι
to Προμηθεύς,[286] who is the Greek fire-robber. Through an unauthorized
Sanskrit word “pramâthyus,” which comes by way of “pramantha,” and which
possesses the double meaning of “Rubber” and “Robber,” the transition to
Prometheus was effected. With that, however, the prefix “pra” caused
special difficulty, so that the whole derivation was doubted by a series
of authors, and was held, in part, as erroneous. On the other hand, it
was pointed out that as the Thuric Zeus bore the especially interesting
cognomen Προ-μανθεύς, thus Προ-μηθεύς might not be an original
Indo-Germanic stem word that was related to the Sanskrit “pramantha,”
but might represent only a cognomen. This interpretation is supported by
a gloss of Hesychius, Ἰθάς: ὁ τῶν Τιτάνων κήρυξ Προμηθεύς.[287] Another
gloss of Hesychius explains ἰθαίνομαι (ιαίνω) as θερμαίνομαι, through
which Ἰθάς attains the meaning of “the flaming one,” analogous to Αἴθων
or Φλεγύας.[288] The relation of Prometheus to pramantha could scarcely
be so direct as Kuhn conjectures. The question of an indirect relation
is not decided with that. Above all, Προμηθεύς is of great significance
as a surname for Ἰθάς, since the “flaming one” is the “fore-thinker.”
(_Pramati_ = precaution is also an attribute of Agni, although _pramati_
is of another derivation.) Prometheus, however, belongs to the line of
Phlegians which was placed by Kuhn in uncontested relationship to the
Indian priest family of Bhṛgu.[289] The Bhṛgu are like Mâtariçvan (the
“one swelling in the mother”), also fire-bringers. Kuhn quotes a
passage, according to which Bhṛgu also arises from the flame like Agni.
(“In the flame Bhṛgu originated. Bhṛgu roasted, but did not burn.”) This
view leads to a root related to Bhṛgu, that is to say, to the Sanskrit
_bhrây_ = to light, Latin _fulgeo_ and Greek φλέγω (Sanskrit _bhargas_ =
splendor, Latin _fulgur_). Bhṛgu appears, therefore, as “the shining
one.” Φλεγύας means a certain species of eagle, on account of its
burnished gold color. The connection with φλέγειν, which signifies “to
burn,” is clear. The Phlegians are also the fire eagles.[290] Prometheus
also belongs to the Phlegians. The path from Pramantha to Prometheus
passes not through the word, but through the idea, and, therefore, we
should adopt this same meaning for Prometheus as that which Pramantha
attains from the Hindoo fire symbolism.[291]

The Pramantha, as the tool of Manthana (the fire sacrifice), is
considered purely sexual in the Hindoo; the Pramantha as phallus, or
man; the bored wood underneath as vulva, or woman.[292] The resulting
fire is the child, the divine son Agni. The two pieces of wood are
called in the cult Purûravas and Urvaçî, and were thought of personified
as man and woman. The fire was born from the genitals of the woman.[293]
An especially interesting representation of fire production, as a
religious ceremony (manthana), is given by Weber:[294]

  “A certain sacrificial fire was lit by the rubbing together of two
  sticks; one piece of wood is taken up with the words: ‘Thou art the
  birthplace of the fire,’ and two blades of grass are placed upon it;
  ‘Ye are the two testicles,’ to the ‘adhârarani’ (the underlying wood):
  ‘Thou art Urvaçî’; then the utarârani (that which is placed on top) is
  anointed with butter. ‘Thou art Power.’ This is then placed on the
  adhârarani. ‘Thou art Purûravas’ and both are rubbed three times. ‘I
  rub thee with the Gâyatrîmetrum: I rub thee with the Trishtubhmeṭrum:
  I rub thee with the Jagatîmetrum.’”

The sexual symbolism of this fire production is unmistakable. We see
here also the rhythm, the metre in its original place as sexual rhythm,
rising above the mating call into music. A song of the Rigveda[295]
conveys the same interpretation and symbolism:

 “Here is the gear for function, here tinder made ready for the spark.
 Bring thou the matron:[296] we will rub Agni in ancient fashion forth.
 In the two fire-sticks Jâtavedas lieth, even as the well-formed germ in
    pregnant women;
 Agni who day by day must be exalted by men who watch and worship with
    oblations;
 Lay this with care on that which lies extended: straight hath she borne
    the steer when made prolific.

 With his red pillar—radiant in his splendor—in our skilled task is born
    the son of Ilâ.”[297]—_Book III._ xxix: 1–3.

Side by side with the unequivocal coitus symbolism we see that the
Pramantha is also Agni, the created son. The Phallus is the son, or the
son is the Phallus. Therefore, Agni in the Vedic mythology has the
threefold character. With this we are once more connected with the
above-mentioned Cabiric Father-Son-Cult. In the modern German language
we have preserved echoes of the primitive symbols. A boy is designated
as “bengel” (short, thick piece of wood). In Hessian as “stift” or
“bolzen” (arrow,[298] wooden peg or stump). The Artemisia Abrotanum,
which is called in German “Stabwurz” (stick root), is called in English
“Boy’s Love.” (The vulgar designation of the penis as “boy” was remarked
even by Grimm and others.) The ceremonial production of fire was
retained in Europe as late as the nineteenth century as a superstitious
custom. Kuhn mentions such a case even in the year 1828, which occurred
in Germany. The solemn, magic ceremony was called the “Nodfyr”—“The fire
of need”[299]—and the charm was chiefly used against cattle epidemics.
Kuhn cites from the chronicle of Lanercost of the year 1268 an
especially noteworthy case of the “Nodfyr,”[300] the ceremonies of which
plainly reveal the fundamental phallic meaning:

  “Pro fidei divinæ integritate servanda recolat lector, quod cum hoc
  anno in Laodonia pestis grassaretur in pecudes armenti, quam vocant
  usetati Lungessouht, quidam bestiales, habitu claustrales non animo,
  docebant idiotas patriæ ignem confrictione de lignis educere et
  simulacrum Priapi statuere, et per hæc bestiis succurrere. Quod cum
  unus laicus Cisterciensis apud Fentone fecisset ante atrium aulæ, ac
  intinctis testiculis canis in aquam benedictam super animalis
  sparsisset, etc.”[301]

These examples, which allow us to recognize a clear sexual symbolism in
the generation of fire, prove, therefore, since they originate from
different times and different peoples, the existence of a universal
tendency to credit to fire production not only a magical but also a
sexual significance. This ceremonial or magic repetition of this very
ancient, long-outlived observance shows how insistently the human mind
clings to the old forms, and how deeply rooted is this very ancient
reminiscence of fire boring. One might almost be inclined to see in the
sexual symbolism of fire production a relatively late addition to the
priestly lore. This may, indeed, be true for the ceremonial elaboration
of the fire mysteries, but whether originally the generation of fire was
in general a sexual action, that is to say, a “coitus-play,” is still a
question. That similar things occur among very primitive people we learn
from the Australian tribe of the Watschandies,[302] who in the spring
perform the following magic ceremonies of fertilization: They dig a hole
in the ground, so formed and surrounded with bushes as to counterfeit a
woman’s genitals. They dance the night long around this hole; in
connection with this they hold spears in front of themselves in a manner
to recall the penis in erection. They dance around the hole and thrust
their spears into the ditch, while they cry to it, “Pulli nira, pulli
nira, _wataka_!” (Non fossa, non fossa, sed cunnus!) Such obscene dances
appear among other primitive races as well.[303]

In this spring incantation are contained the elements of the coitus
play.[304] This play is nothing but a coitus game, that is to say,
originally this play was simply a coitus in the form of sacramental
mating, which for a long time was a mysterious element among certain
cults, and reappeared in sects.[305] In the ceremonies of Zinzendorf’s
followers echoes of the coitus sacrament may be recognized; also in
other sects.

One can easily think that just as the above-mentioned Australian bushmen
perform the coitus play in this manner the same performance could be
enacted in another manner, and, indeed, in the form of fire production.
Instead of through two selected human beings, the coitus was represented
by two substitutes, by Purûravas and Urvaçi, by Phallus and Vulva, by
borer and opening. Just as the primitive thought behind other customs is
really the sacramental coition so here the primal tendency is really the
act itself. For the act of fertilization is the climax—the true festival
of life, and well worthy to become the nucleus of a religious mystery.
If we are justified in concluding that the symbolism of the hole in the
earth used by the Watschandies for the fertilization of the earth takes
the place of the coitus, then the generation of fire could be considered
in the same way as a substitute for coitus; and, indeed, it might be
further concluded as a consequence of this reasoning that the invention
of fire-making is also due to the need of supplying a symbol for the
sexual act.[306]

Let us return, for a moment, to the infantile symptom of boring. Let us
imagine a strong adult man carrying on the boring with two pieces of
wood with the same perseverance and the energy corresponding to that of
this child. He may very easily create fire by this play. But of greatest
significance in this work is the rhythm.[307] This hypothesis seems to
me psychologically possible, although it should not be said with this
that only in this way could the discovery of fire occur. It can result
just as well by the striking together of flints. It is scarcely possible
that fire was created in only one way. All I want to establish here is
merely the psychologic process, the symbolic indications of which point
to the possibility that in such a way was fire invented or prepared.

The existence of the primitive coitus play or rite seems to me
sufficiently proven. The only thing that is obscure is the energy and
emphasis of the ritual play. It is well known that those primitive rites
were often of very bloody seriousness, and were performed with an
extraordinary display of energy, which appears as a great contrast to
the well-known indolence of primitive humanity. Therefore, the ritual
activity entirely loses the character of play, and wins that of
purposeful effort. If certain Negro races can dance the whole night long
to three tones in the most monotonous manner, then, according to our
idea, there is in this an absolute lack of the character of play
pastime; it approaches nearer to exercise. There seems to exist a sort
of compulsion to transfer the libido into such ritual activity. If the
basis of the ritual activity is the sexual act, we may assume that it is
really the underlying thought and object of the exercise. Under these
circumstances, the question arises why the primitive man endeavors to
represent the sexual act symbolically and with effort, or, if this
wording appears to be too hypothetical, why does he exert energy to such
a degree only to accomplish practically useless things, which apparently
do not especially amuse him?[308] It may be assumed that the sexual act
is more desirable to primitive man than such absurd and, moreover,
fatiguing exercises. It is hardly possible but that a certain compulsion
conducts the energy away from the original object and real purpose,
inducing the production of surrogates. The existence of a phallic or
orgiastic cult does not indicate _eo ipso_ a particularly lascivious
life any more than the ascetic symbolism of Christianity means an
especially moral life. One honors that which one does not possess or
that which one is not. This compulsion, to speak in the nomenclature
formulated above, removes a certain amount of libido from the real
sexual activity, and creates a symbolic and practically valid substitute
for what is lost. This psychology is confirmed by the above-mentioned
Watschandie ceremony; during the entire ceremony none of the men may
look at a woman. This detail again informs us from whence the libido is
to be diverted. But this gives rise to the pressing question, Whence
comes this compulsion? We have already suggested above that the
primitive sexuality encounters a resistance which leads to a
side-tracking of the libido on to substitution actions (analogy,
symbolism, etc.). It is unthinkable that it is a question of any outer
opposition whatsoever, or of a real obstacle, since it occurs to no
savage to catch his elusive quarry with ritual charms; but it is a
question of an internal resistance; will opposes will; libido opposes
libido, since a psychologic resistance as an energic phenomenon
corresponds to a certain amount of libido. The psychologic compulsion
for the transformation of the libido is based on an original division of
the will. I will return to this primal splitting of the libido in
another place. Here let us concern ourselves only with the problem of
the transition of the libido. The transition takes place, as has been
repeatedly suggested by means of shifting to an analogy. The libido is
taken away from its proper place and transferred to another substratum.

The resistance against sexuality aims, therefore, at preventing the
sexual act; it also seeks to crowd the libido away from the sexual
function. We see, for example, in hysteria, how the specific repression
blocks the real path of transference; therefore, the libido is obliged
to take another path, and that an earlier one, namely, the incestuous
road which ultimately leads to the parents. Let us speak, however, of
the incest prohibition, which hindered the very first sexual
transference. Then the situation changes in so far that no earlier way
of transference is left, except that of the presexual stage of
development, where the libido was still partly in the function of
nutrition. By a regression to the presexual material the libido becomes
quasi-desexualized. But as the incest prohibition signifies only a
temporary and conditional restriction of the sexuality, thus only that
part of the libido which is best designated as the incestuous component
is now pushed back to the presexual stage. The repression, therefore,
concerns only that part of the sexual libido which wishes to fix itself
permanently upon the parents. The sexual libido is only withdrawn from
the incestuous component, repressed upon the presexual stage, and there,
if the operation is successful, desexualized, by which this amount of
libido is prepared for an asexual application. However, it is to be
assumed that this operation is accomplished only with difficulty,
because the incestuous libido, so to speak, must be artificially
separated from the sexual libido, with which, for ages, through the
whole animal kingdom, it was indistinguishably united. The regression of
the incestuous component must, therefore, take place, not only with
great difficulty, but also carry with it into the presexual stage a
considerable sexual character. The consequence of this is that the
resulting phenomena, although stamped with the character of the sexual
act, are, nevertheless, not really sexual acts _de facto_; they are
derived from the presexual stage, and are maintained by the repressed
sexual libido, therefore possess a double significance. Thus the fire
boring is a coitus (and, to be sure, an incestuous one), but a
desexualized one, which has lost its immediate sexual worth, and is,
therefore, indirectly useful to the propagation of the species. The
presexual stage is characterized by countless possibilities of
application, because the libido has not yet formed definite
localizations. It therefore appears intelligible that an amount of
libido which reaches this stage through regression is confronted with
manifold possibilities of application. Above all, it is met with the
possibility of a purely onanistic activity. But as the matter in
question in the regressive component of libido is sexual libido, the
ultimate object of which is propagation, therefore it goes to the
external object (Parents); it will also introvert with this destination
as its essential character. The result, therefore, is that the purely
onanistic activity turns out to be insufficient, and another object must
be sought for, which takes the place of the incest object. The nurturing
mother earth represents the ideal example of such an object. The
psychology of the presexual stage contributes the nutrition component;
the sexual libido the coitus idea. From this the ancient symbols of
agriculture arise. In the work of agriculture hunger and incest
intermingle. The ancient cults of mother earth and all the superstitions
founded thereon saw in the cultivation of the earth the fertilization of
the mother. The aim of the action is desexualized, however, for it is
the fruit of the field and the nourishment contained therein. The
regression resulting from the incest prohibition leads, in this case, to
the new valuation of the mother; this time, however, not as a sexual
object, but as a nourisher.

The discovery of fire seems to be due to a very similar regression to
the presexual stage, more particularly to the nearest stage of the
displaced rhythmic manifestation. The libido, introverted from the
incest prohibition (with the more detailed designation of the motor
components of coitus), when it reaches the presexual stage, meets the
related infantile boring, to which it now gives, in accordance with its
realistic destination, an actual material. (Therefore the material is
fittingly called “materia,” as the object is the mother as above.) As I
sought to show above, the action of the infantile boring requires only
the strength and perseverance of an adult man and suitable “material” in
order to generate fire. If this is so, it may be expected that analogous
to our foregoing case of onanistic boring the generation of fire
originally occurred as such an act of quasi-onanistic activity,
objectively expressed. The demonstration of this can never be actually
furnished, but it is thinkable that somewhere traces of this original
onanistic preliminary exercise of fire production have been preserved. I
have succeeded in finding a passage in a very old monument of Hindoo
literature which contains this transition of the sexual libido through
the onanistic phase in the preparation of fire. This passage is found in
Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad:[309]

  “In truth, he (Âtman)[310] was as large as a woman and a man, when
  they embrace each other. This, his own self, he divided into two
  parts, out of which husband and wife were formed.[311] With her, he
  copulated; from this humanity sprang. She, however, pondered: ‘How may
  he unite with me after he has created me from himself? Now I shall
  hide!’ Then she became a cow; he, however, became a bull and mated
  with her. From that sprang the horned cattle. Then she became a mare;
  he, however, became a stallion; she became a she-ass; he, an ass, and
  mated with her. From these sprang the whole-hoofed animals. She became
  a goat; he became a buck; she became an ewe; he became a ram, and
  mated with her. Thus were created goats and sheep. Thus it happened
  that all that mates, even down to the ants, he created—then he
  perceived: ‘Truly I myself am Creation, for I have created the whole
  world!’ Thereupon he rubbed his hands (held before the mouth) so that
  he brought forth fire from his mouth, as from the mother womb, and
  from his hands.”

We meet here a peculiar myth of creation which requires a psychologic
interpretation. In the beginning the libido was undifferentiated and
bisexual;[312] this was followed by differentiation into a male and a
female component. From then on man knows what he is. Now follows a gap
in the coherence of the thought where belongs that very resistance which
we have postulated above for the explanation of the urge for
sublimation. Next follows the onanistic act of rubbing or boring (here
finger-sucking) transferred from the sexual zone, from which proceeds
the production of fire.[313] The libido here leaves its characteristic
manifestation as sexual function and regresses to the presexual stage,
where, in conformity with the above explanation, it occupies one of the
preliminary stages of sexuality, thereby producing, in the view
expressed in the Upanishad, the first human art, and from there, as
suggested by Kuhn’s idea of the root “manth,” perhaps the higher
intellectual activity in general. This course of development is not
strange to the psychiatrist, for it is a well-known psychopathological
fact that onanism and excessive activity of phantasy are very closely
related. (The sexualizing-autonomizing of the mind through
autoerotism[314] is so familiar a fact that examples of that are
superfluous.) The course of the libido, as we may conclude from these
studies, originally proceeded in a similar manner as in the child, only
in a reversed sequence. The sexual act was pushed out of its proper zone
and was transferred into the analogous mouth zone[315]—the mouth
receiving the significance of the female genitals; the hand and the
fingers, respectively, receiving the phallic meaning.[316] In this
manner the regressively reoccupied activity of the presexual stage is
invested with the sexual significance, which, indeed, it already
possessed, in part, before, but in a wholly different sense. Certain
functions of the presexual stage are found to be permanently suitable,
and, therefore, are retained later on as sexual functions. Thus, for
example, the mouth zone is retained as of erotic importance, meaning
that its valuation is permanently fixed. Concerning the mouth, we know
that it also has a sexual meaning among animals, inasmuch as, for
example, stallions bite mares in the sexual act; also, cats, cocks, etc.
A second significance of the mouth is as an instrument of speech, it
serves essentially in the production of the mating call, which mostly
represents the developed tones of the animal kingdom. As to the hand, we
know that it has the important significance of the contrectation organ
(for example, among frogs). The frequent erotic use of the hand among
monkeys is well known. If there exists a resistance against the real
sexuality, then the accumulated libido is most likely to cause a
hyperfunction of those collaterals which are most adapted to compensate
for the resistance, that is to say, the nearest functions which serve
for the introduction of the act;[317] on one side the function of the
hand, on the other that of the mouth. The sexual act, however, against
which the opposition is directed is replaced by a similar act of the
presexual stage, the classic case being either finger-sucking or boring.
Just as among apes the foot can on occasions take the place of the hand,
so the child is often uncertain in the choice of the object to suck, and
puts the big toe in the mouth instead of the finger. This last movement
belongs to a Hindoo rite, only the big toe was not put in the mouth, but
held against the eye.[318] Through the sexual significance of the hand
and mouth these organs, which in the presexual stage served to obtain
pleasure, are invested with a procreating power which is identical with
the above-mentioned destination, which aims at the external object,
because it concerns the sexual or creating libido. When, through the
actual preparation of fire, the sexual character of the libido employed
in that is fulfilled, then the mouth zone remains without adequate
expression; only the hand has now reached its real, purely human goal in
its first art.

The mouth has, as we saw, a further important function, which has just
as much sexual relation to the object as the hand, that is to say, the
production of the mating call. In opening up the autoerotic ring
(hand-mouth),[319] where the phallic hand became the fire-producing
tool, the libido which was directed to the mouth zone was obliged to
seek another path of functioning, which naturally was found in the
already existing love call. The excess of libido entering here must have
had the usual results, namely, the stimulation of the newly possessed
function; hence an elaboration of the mating call.

We know that from the primitive sounds human speech has developed.
Corresponding to the psychological situation, it might be assumed that
language owes its real origin to this moment, when the impulse,
repressed into the presexual stage, turns to the external in order to
find an equivalent object there. The real thought as a conscious
activity is, as we saw in the first part of this book, a thinking with
positive determination towards the external world, that is to say, a
“speech thinking.” This sort of thinking seems to have originated at
that moment. It is very remarkable that this view, which was won by the
path of reasoning, is again supported by old tradition and other
mythological fragments.

In Aitareyopanishad[320] the following quotation is to be found in
the doctrine of the development of man: “Being brooded-o’er, his
mouth hatched out, like as an egg; from out his mouth (came) speech,
from speech, the fire.” In Part II, where it is depicted how the
newly created objects entered man, it reads: “Fire, speech becoming,
entered in the mouth.” These quotations allow us to plainly
recognize the intimate connection between fire and speech.[321] In
Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad is to be found this passage:

  “‘Yayñavalkya,’ thus he spake, ‘when after the death of this man his
  speech entereth the fire, his breath into the wind, his eye into the
  sun, etc.’”

A further quotation from the Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad reads:

  “But when the sun is set, O Yayñavalkya, and the moon has set, and the
  fire is extinguished, what then serves man as light? Then speech
  serves him as light; then, by the light of speech he sits, and moves,
  he carries on his work, and he returns home. But when the sun is set,
  O Yayñavalkya, and the moon is set, and the fire extinguished, and the
  voice is dumb, what then serves man as light? Then he serves himself
  (Atman) as light; then, by the light of himself, he sits and moves,
  carries on his work and returns home.”

In this passage we notice that fire again stands in the closest relation
to speech. Speech itself is called a “light,” which, in its turn, is
reduced to the “light” of the Atman, the creating psychic force, the
libido. Thus the Hindoo metapsychology conceives speech and fire as
emanations of the inner light from which we know that it is libido.
Speech and fire are its forms of manifestation, the first human arts,
which have resulted from its transformation. This common psychologic
origin seems also to be indicated by certain results of philology. The
Indo-Germanic root _bhâ_ designates the idea of “to lighten, to shine.”
This root is found in Greek, φάω, φαίνω, φάος[322]; in old Icelandic
_bán_ = white, in New High German _bohnen_ = to make shining. The same
root _bhâ_ also designates “to speak”; it is found in Sanskrit _bhan_ =
to speak, Armenian _ban_ = word, in New High German _bann_ = to banish,
Greek φᾱ-μί, ἔφαν, φấτις.[323] Latin _fâ-ri_, _fânum_.

The root _bhelso_, with the meanings “to ring, to bark,” is found in
Sanskrit _bhas_ = to bark and _bhâs_ = to talk, to speak; Lithuanian
_balsas_ = voice, tone. Really _bhel-sô_ = to be bright or luminous.
Compare Greek φάλος = bright, Lithuanian _bálti_ = to become white,
Middle High German _blasz_ = pale.

The root _lâ_, with the meaning of “to make sound, to bark,” is found in
Sanskrit _las_, _lásati_ = to resound; and _las_, _lásati_ = to radiate,
to shine.

The related root _lesô_, with the meaning “desire,” is also found in
Sanskrit _las_, _lásati_ = to play; _lash_, _láshati_ = to desire. Greek
λάσταυρος = lustful, Gothic _lustus_, New High German _Lust_, Latin
_lascivus_.

A further related root, _lásô_ = to shine, to radiate, is found in
_las_, _lásati_ = to radiate, to shine.

This group unites, as is evident, the meanings of “to desire, to play,
to radiate, and to sound.” A similar archaic confluence of meanings in
the primal libido symbolism (as we are perhaps justified in calling it)
is found in that class of Egyptian words which are derived from the
closely related roots _ben_ and _bel_ and the reduplication _benben_ and
_belbel_. The original significance of these roots is “to burst forth,
to emerge, to extrude, to well out,” with the associated idea of
bubbling, boiling and roundness. _Belbel_, accompanied by the sign of
the obelisk, of originally phallic nature, means source of light. The
obelisk itself had besides the names of _techenu_ and _men_ also the
name _benben_, more rarely _berber_ and _belbel_.[324] The libido
symbolism makes clear this connection, it seems to me.

The Indo-Germanic root _vel_, with the meaning “to wave, to undulate”
(fire), is found in Sanskrit _ulunka_ = burning, Greek ἀλέα, Attic ἁλέα
= warmth of the sun, Gothic _vulan_ = to undulate, Old High German and
Middle High German _walm_ = heat, glow.

The related Indo-Germanic root _vélkô_, with the meaning of “to lighten,
to glow,” is found in Sanskrit _ulkă_ = firebrand, Greek Ϝελχᾶνος =
Vulcan. This same root _vel_ means also “to sound”; in Sanskrit _vâní_ =
tone, song, music. Tschech _volati_ = to call.

The root _svénô_ = to sound, to ring, is found in Sanskrit _svan_,
_svánati_ = to rustle, to sound; Zend _qanañt_, Latin _sonâre_, Old
Iranian _senm_, Cambrian _sain_, Latin _sonus_, Anglo-Saxon _svinsian_ =
to resound. The related root _svénos_ = noise, sound, is found in Vedic
_svánas_ = noise, Latin _sonor_, _sonorus_. A further related root is
_svonós_ = tone, noise; in Old Iranian _son_ = word.

The root _své_ (n), locative _svéni_, dative _sunéi_, means sun; in Zend
_qeñg_ = sun. (Compare above _svénô_, Zend _qanañt_); Gothic _sun-na_,
_sunnô_.[325] Here Goethe has preceded us:

               “The sun orb sings in emulation,
               ’Mid brother-spheres, his ancient round:
               His path predestined through Creation,
               He ends with step of thunder sound.”
                                       —_Faust._ Part I.

              “Hearken! Hark! the hours careering!
              Sounding loud to spirit-hearing,
              See the new-born Day appearing!
              Rocky portals jarring shatter,
              Phœbus’ wheels in rolling clatter,
              With a crash the Light draws near!
              Pealing rays and trumpet-blazes,
              Eye is blinded, ear amazes;
              The Unheard can no one hear!
              Slip within each blossom-bell,
              Deeper, deeper, there to dwell,—
              In the rocks, beneath the leaf!
              If it strikes you, you are deaf.”
                                        —_Faust._ Part II.

We also must not forget the beautiful verse of Hölderlin:

             “Where art thou? Drunken, my soul dreams
             Of all thy rapture. Yet even now I hearken
             As full of golden tones the radiant sun youth
             Upon his heavenly lyre plays his even song
             To the echoing woods and hills.”

Just as in archaic speech fire and the speech sounds (the mating call,
music) appear as forms of emanation of the libido, thus light and sound
entering the psyche become one: libido.

Manilius expresses it in his beautiful verses:

                 “Quid mirum noscere mundum
   Si possunt homines, quibus est et mundus in ipsis
   Exemplumque dei quisque est in imagine parva?
   An quoquam genitos nisi cælo credere fas est
   Esse homines?
                 Stetit unus in arcem
   Erectus capitis victorque ad sidera mittit sidereos oculos.”[326]

The idea of the Sanskrit _têjas_ suggests the fundamental significance
of the libido for the conception of the world in general. I am indebted
to Dr. Abegg, in Zurich, a thorough Sanskrit scholar, for the
compilation of the eight meanings of this word.

_Têjas_ signifies:

  1. Sharpness, cutting edge.

  2. Fire, splendor, light, glow, heat.

  3. Healthy appearance, beauty.

  4. The fiery and color-producing power of the human organism (thought
  to be in the bile).

  5. Power, energy, vital force.

  6. Passionate nature.

  7. Mental, also magic, strength; influence, position, dignity.

  8. Sperma.

This gives us a dim idea of how, for primitive thought, the so-called
objective world was, and had to be, a subjective image. To this thought
must be applied the words of the “Chorus Mysticus”:

                        “All that is perishable
                        Is only an allegory.”

The Sanskrit word for fire is _agnis_ (the Latin _ignis_);[327] the fire
personified is the god Agni, the divine mediator,[328] whose symbol has
certain points of contact with that of Christ. In Avesta and in the
Vedas the fire is the messenger of the gods. In the Christian mythology
certain parts are closely related with the myth of Agni. Daniel speaks
of the three men in the fiery furnace:

  “Then Nebuchadnezar, the King, was astonished, and rose up in haste
  and spake, and said unto his counsellors: ‘Did not we cast three men
  bound into the midst of the fire?’

  “They answered and said: ‘True, O King!’

  “He answered and said: ‘Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst
  of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like
  the Son of God.’”

In regard to that the “Biblia pauperum” observes (according to an old
German incunabulum of 1471):

  “One reads in the third chapter of the prophet Daniel that
  Nebuchadnezar, the King, caused three men to be placed in a glowing
  furnace and that the king often went there, looked in, and that he saw
  with the three, a fourth, who was like the Son of God. The three
  signify for us, the Holy Trinity and the fourth, the unity of the
  being. Christ, too, in His explanation designated the person of the
  Trinity and the unity of the being.”

According to this mystic interpretation, the legend of the three men in
the fiery furnace appears as a magic fire ceremony by means of which the
Son of God reveals himself. The Trinity is brought together with the
unity, or, in other words, through coitus a child is produced. The
glowing furnace (like the glowing tripod in “Faust”) is a mother symbol,
where the children are produced.[329] The fourth in the fiery furnace
appears as Christ, the Son of God, who has become a visible God in the
fire. The mystic trinity and unity are sexual symbols. (Compare with
that the many references in Inman: “Ancient Pagan and Modern Christian
Symbolism.”) It is said of the Saviour of Israel (the Messiah) and of
his enemies, _Isaiah_ x:17:

  “And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a
  flame.”

In a hymn of the Syrian Ephrem it is said of Christ: “Thou who art all
fire, have mercy upon me.”

Agni is the sacrificial flame, the sacrificer, and the sacrificed, as
Christ himself. Just as Christ left behind his redeeming blood, φάρμακον
ἀθανασίας,[330] in the stimulating wine, so Agni is the Soma, the holy
drink of inspiration, the mead of immortality.[331] Soma and Fire are
entirely identical in Hindoo literature, so that in Soma we easily
rediscover the libido symbol, through which a series of apparently
paradoxical qualities of the Soma are immediately explained. As the old
Hindoos recognized in fire an emanation of the inner libido fire, so too
they recognized, in the intoxicating drink (Firewater, Soma-Agni, as
rain and fire), an emanation of libido. The Vedic definition of Soma as
seminal fluid confirms this interpretation.[332] The Soma significance
of fire, similar to the significance of the body of Christ in the Last
Supper (compare the Passover lamb of the Jews, baked in the form of a
cross), is explained by the psychology of the presexual stage, where the
libido was still in part the function of nutrition. The “Soma” is the
“nourishing drink,” the mythological characterization of which runs
parallel to fire in its origin; therefore, both are united in Agni. The
drink of immortality was stirred by the Hindoo gods like fire. Through
the retreat of the libido into the presexual stage it becomes clear why
so many gods were either defined sexually or were devoured.

As was shown by our discussion of fire preparation, the fire tool did
not receive its sexual significance as a later addition, but the sexual
libido was the motor power which led to its discovery, so that the later
teachings of the priests were nothing but confirmations of its actual
origin. Other primitive discoveries probably have acquired their sexual
symbolism in the same manner, being also derived from the sexual libido.

In the previous statements, which were based on the Pramantha of the
Agni sacrifice, we have concerned ourselves only with one significance
of the word manthâmi or mathnâmi, that is to say, with that which
expresses the movement of rubbing. As Kuhn shows, however, this word
also possesses the meaning of tearing off, taking away by violence,
robbing.[333] As Kuhn points out, this significance is already extant in
the Vedic text. The legend of its discovery always expresses the
production of fire as a robbery. (In this far it belongs to the motive
widely spread over the earth of the treasure difficult to attain.) The
fact that in many places and not alone in India the preparation of fire
is represented as having its origin in robbery, seems to point to a
widely spread thought, according to which the preparation of fire was
something forbidden, something usurped or criminal, which could be
obtained only through stratagem or deeds of violence (mostly through
stratagem).[334] When onanism confronts the physician as a symptom it
does so frequently under the symbol of secret pilfering, or crafty
imposition, which always signifies the concealed fulfilment of a
forbidden wish.[335] Historically, this train of thought probably
implies that the ritual preparation of fire was employed with a magic
purpose, and, therefore, was pursued by official religions; then it
became a ritual mystery,[336] guarded by the priests and surrounded with
secrecy. The ritual laws of the Hindoos threaten with severe punishment
him who prepares fire in an incorrect manner. The fact alone that
something is mysterious means the same as something done in concealment;
that which must remain secret, which one may not see nor do; also
something which is surrounded by severe punishment of body and soul;
therefore, presumably, _something forbidden_ which has received a
license as a religious rite. After all has been said about the genesis
of the preparation of fire, it is no longer difficult to guess what is
the forbidden thing; _it is onanism_. When I stated before that it might
be lack of satisfaction which breaks up the autoerotic ring of the
displaced sexual activity transferred to the body itself, and thus opens
wider fields of culture, I did not mention that this loosely closed ring
of the displaced onanistic activity could be much more firmly closed,
when man makes the other great discovery, that of true onanism.[337]
With that the activity is started in the proper place, and this, under
certain circumstances, may mean a satisfaction sufficient for a long
time, but at the expense of cheating sexuality of its real purpose. It
is a fraud upon the natural development of things, because all the
dynamic forces which can and should serve the development of culture are
withdrawn from it through onanism, since, instead of the displacement, a
regression to the local sexual takes place, which is precisely the
opposite of that which is desirable. Psychologically, however, onanism
is a discovery of a significance not to be undervalued. One is protected
from fate, since no sexual need then has the power to give one up to
life. For with onanism one has the greatest magic in one’s hands; one
needs only to phantasy, and with that to masturbate, then one possesses
all the pleasure of the world, and is no longer compelled to conquer the
world of one’s desires through hard labor and wrestling with
reality.[338] Aladdin rubs his lamp and the obedient genii stand at his
bidding; thus the fairy tale expresses the great psychologic advantage
of the easy regression to the local sexual satisfaction. Aladdin’s
symbol subtly confirms the ambiguity of the magic fire preparation.

The close relation of the generation of fire to the onanistic act is
illustrated by a case, the knowledge of which I owe to Dr. Schmid, in
Cery, that of an imbecile peasant youth who set many incendiary fires.
At one of these conflagrations he drew suspicion to himself by his
behavior. He stood with his hands in his trouser pockets in the door of
an opposite house and gazed with apparent delight at the fire. Under
examination in the insane asylum, he described the fire in great detail,
and made suspicious movements in his trouser pockets with his hands. The
physical examination undertaken at once showed that he had masturbated.
Later he confessed that he had masturbated at the time when he had
enjoyed the fire which he had enkindled himself.

The preparation of fire in itself is a perfectly ordinary useful custom,
employed everywhere for many centuries, which in itself involved nothing
more mysterious than eating and drinking. However, there was always a
tendency from time to time to prepare fire in a ceremonious and
mysterious manner (exactly as with ritual eating and drinking), which
was to be carried out in an exactly prescribed way and from which no one
dared differ. This mysterious tendency associated with the technique is
the second path in the onanistic regression, always present by the side
of culture. The strict rules applied to it, the zeal of the ceremonial
preparations and the religious awe of the mysteries next originate from
this source; the ceremonial, although apparently irrational, is an
extremely ingenious institution from the psychologic standpoint, for it
represents a substitute for the possibility of onanistic regression
accurately circumscribed by law. The law cannot apply to the content of
the ceremony, for it is really quite indifferent for the ritual act,
whether it is carried out in this way or in that way. On the contrary,
it is very essential whether the restrained libido is discharged through
a sterile onanism or transposed into the path of sublimation. These
severe measures of protection apply primarily to onanism.[339]

I am indebted to Freud for a further important reference to the
onanistic nature of the fire theft, or rather the motive of _the
treasure difficult of attainment_ (to which fire theft belongs).
Mythology contains repeated formulas which read approximately as
follows: The treasure must be plucked or torn off from a taboo tree
(Paradise tree, Hesperides); this is a forbidden and dangerous act. The
clearest example of this is the old barbaric custom in the service of
Diana of Aricia: only he can become a priest of the goddess who, in her
sacred grove, dares to tear off (“abzureissen”) a bough. The tearing off
has been retained in vulgar speech (besides “abreiben,” rubbing) as a
symbol of the act of onanism. Thus “reiben,” to rub, is like “reissen,”
to break off, both of which are contained in manthami and united
apparently only through the myth of the fire theft bound up in the act
of onanism in a deeper stratum wherein “reiben,” properly speaking,
“reissen,” is employed, but in a transferred sense. Therefore, it might
perhaps be anticipated that in the deepest stratum, namely, the
incestuous, which precedes the autoerotic stage,[340] the two meanings
coincide, which, through lack of mythological tradition, can perhaps be
traced through etymology only.




                               CHAPTER IV
                   THE UNCONSCIOUS ORIGIN OF THE HERO


Prepared by the previous chapters, we approach the personification of
the libido in the form of a conqueror, a hero or a demon. With this,
symbolism leaves the impersonal and neuter realm, which characterizes
the astral and meteorologic symbol, and takes human form: the figure of
a being changing from sorrow to joy, from joy to sorrow, and which, like
the sun, sometimes stands in its zenith, sometimes is plunged in darkest
night, and arises from this very night to new splendor.[341] Just as the
sun, guided by its own internal laws, ascends from morn till noon, and
passing beyond the noon descends towards evening, leaving behind its
splendor, and then sinks completely into the all-enveloping night, thus,
too, does mankind follow his course according to immutable laws, and
also sinks, after his course is completed, into night, in order to rise
again in the morning to a new cycle in his children. The symbolic
transition from sun to man is easy and practicable. The third and last
creation of Miss Miller’s also takes this course. She calls this piece
“Chiwantopel,” a “hypnagogic poem.” She gives us the following
information about the circumstances surrounding the origin of this
phantasy:

  “After an evening of care and anxiety, I lay down to sleep at about
  half past eleven. I felt excited and unable to sleep, although I was
  very tired. There was no light in the room. I closed my eyes, and then
  I had the feeling that something was about to happen. The sensation of
  a general relaxation came over me, and I remained as passive as
  possible. Lines appeared before my eyes,—sparks and shining spirals,
  followed by a kaleidoscopic review of recent trivial occurrences.”

The reader will regret with me that we cannot know the reason for her
cares and anxieties. It would have been of great importance for what
follows to have information on this point. This gap in our knowledge is
the more to be deplored because, between the first poem in 1898 and the
time of the phantasy here discussed (1902), four whole years have
passed. All information is lacking regarding this period, during which
the great problem surely survived in the unconscious. Perhaps this lack
has its advantages in that our interest is not diverted from the
universal applicability of the phantasy here produced by sympathy in
regard to the personal fate of the author. Therefore, something is
obviated which often prevents the analyst in his daily task from looking
away from the tedious toil of detail to that wider relation which
reveals each neurotic conflict to be involved with human fate as a
whole.

The condition depicted by the author here corresponds to such a one as
usually precedes an intentional somnambulism[342] often described by
spiritualistic mediums. A certain inclination to listen to these low
nocturnal voices must be assumed; otherwise such fine and hardly
perceptible inner experiences pass unnoticed. We recognize in this
listening a current of the libido leading inward and beginning to flow
towards a still invisible, mysterious goal. It seems that the libido has
suddenly discovered an object in the depths of the unconscious which
powerfully attracts it. The life of man, turned wholly to the external
by nature, does not ordinarily permit such introversion; there must,
therefore, be surmised a certain exceptional condition, that is to say,
a lack of external objects, which compels the individual to seek a
substitute for them in his own soul. It is, however, difficult to
imagine that this rich world has become too poor to offer an object for
the love of human atoms; nor can the world and its objects be held
accountable for this lack. It offers boundless opportunities for every
one. It is rather the _incapacity to love which robs mankind of his
possibilities_. This world is empty to him alone who does not understand
how to direct his libido towards objects, and to render them alive and
beautiful for himself, for Beauty does not indeed lie in things, but in
the feeling that we give to them. That which compels us to create a
substitute for ourselves is not the external lack of objects, but our
incapacity to lovingly include a thing outside of ourselves. Certainly
the difficulties of the conditions of life and the adversities of the
struggle for existence may oppress us, yet even adverse external
situations would not hinder the giving out of the libido; on the
contrary, they may spur us on to the greatest exertions, whereby we
bring our whole libido into reality. Real difficulties alone will never
be able to force the libido back permanently to such a degree as to give
rise, for example, to a neurosis. _The conflict, which is the condition
of every neurosis, is lacking._ The resistance, which opposes its
unwillingness to the will, alone has the power to produce that
pathogenic introversion which is the starting point of every psychogenic
disturbance. The resistance against loving produces the inability to
love. Just as the normal libido is comparable to a steady stream which
pours its waters broadly into the world of reality, so the resistance,
dynamically considered, is comparable, not so much to a rock rearing up
in the river bed which is flooded over or surrounded by the stream, as
to a backward flow towards the source. A part of the soul desires the
outer object; another part, however, harks back to the subjective world,
where the airy and fragile palaces of phantasy beckon. One can assume
the dualism of the human will for which Bleuler, from the psychiatric
point of view, has coined the word “ambitendency”[343] as something
generally present, bearing in mind that even the most primitive motor
impulse is in opposition; as, for example, in the act of extension, the
flexor muscles also become innervated. This normal ambitendency,
however, never leads to an inhibition or prevention of the intended act,
but is the indispensable preliminary requirement for its perfection and
coördination. For a resistance disturbing to this act to arise from this
harmony of finely attuned opposition an abnormal plus or minus would be
needed on one or the other side. The resistance originates from this
added third.[344] This applies also to the duality of the will, from
which so many difficulties arise for mankind. The abnormal third frees
the pair of opposites, which are normally most intimately united, and
causes their manifestation in the form of separate tendencies; it is
only thus that they become willingness and unwillingness, which
interfere with each other. The Bhagavad-Gîtâ says, “Be thou free of the
pairs of opposites.”[345] The harmony thus becomes disharmony. It cannot
be my task here to investigate whence the unknown third arises, and what
it is. Taken at the roots in the case of our patients, the “nuclear
complex” (Freud) reveals itself as the _incest problem_. The sexual
libido regressing to the parents appears as the incest tendency. The
reason this path is so easily travelled is due to the enormous indolence
of mankind, which will relinquish no object of the past, but will hold
it fast forever. The “sacrilegious backward grasp” of which Nietzsche
speaks reveals itself, stripped of its incest covering, as an original
passive arrest of the libido in its first object of childhood. This
indolence is also a passion, as La Rochefoucauld[346] has brilliantly
expressed it:

  “Of all passions, that which is least known to ourselves is indolence:
  it is the most ardent and malignant of them all, although its violence
  may be insensible, and the injuries it causes may be hidden; if we
  will consider its power attentively, we will see that it makes itself,
  upon all occasions, mistress of our sentiments, of our interests, and
  of our pleasures; it is the anchor, which has the power to arrest the
  largest vessels; it is a calm more dangerous to the most important
  affairs than rocks and the worst tempest. The repose of indolence is a
  secret charm of the soul which suddenly stops the most ardent pursuits
  and the firmest resolutions; finally to give the true idea of this
  passion, one must say that indolence is like a beatitude of the soul
  which consoles it for all its losses and takes the place of all its
  possessions.”

This dangerous passion, belonging above all others to primitive man,
appears under the hazardous mask of the incest symbol, from which the
incest fear must drive us away, and which must be conquered, in the
first place, under the image of the “terrible mother.”[347] It is the
mother of innumerable evils, not the least of which are neurotic
troubles. For, especially from the fogs of the arrested remnants of the
libido, arise the harmful phantasmagoria which so veil reality that
adaptation becomes almost impossible. However, we will not investigate
any further in this place the foundations of the incest phantasies. The
preliminary suggestion of my purely psychologic conception of the incest
problem may suffice. We are here only concerned with the question
whether _resistance_ which leads to introversion in our author signifies
a conscious external difficulty or not. If it were an external
difficulty, then, indeed, the libido would be violently dammed back, and
would produce a flood of phantasies, which can best be designated as
schemes, that is to say, plans as to how the obstacles could be
overcome. They would be very concrete ideas of reality which seek to
pave the way for solutions. It would be a strenuous meditation, indeed,
which would be more likely to lead to anything rather than to a
hypnagogic poem. The passive condition depicted above in no way fits in
with a real external obstacle, but, precisely through its passive
submission, it indicates a tendency which doubtless scorns real
solutions and prefers phantastic substitutes. Ultimately and essentially
we are, therefore, dealing with an internal conflict, perhaps after the
manner of those earlier conflicts which led to the two first unconscious
creations. We, therefore, are forced to conclude that the external
object cannot be loved, because a predominant amount of libido prefers a
phantastic object, which must be brought up from the depths of the
unconscious as a compensation for the missing reality.

The visionary phenomena, produced in the first stages of introversion,
are grouped among the well-known phenomena[348] of hypnagogic vision.
They form, as I explained in an earlier paper, the foundation of the
true visions of the symbolic autorevelations of the libido, as we may
now express it.

Miss Miller continues:

  “Then I had the impression that some communication was immediately
  impending. It seemed to me as if there were re-echoed in me the words,
  ‘Speak, O Lord, for Thy servant listens; open Thou mine ears!’”

This passage very clearly describes the intention; the expression
“communication” is even a current term in spiritualistic circles. The
Biblical words contain a clear invocation or “prayer,” that is to say, a
wish (libido) directed towards divinity (the unconscious complex). The
prayer refers to Samuel, i:3, where Samuel at night was three times
called by God, but believed that it was Eli calling, until the latter
informed him that it was God himself who spoke, and that he must answer
if his name was called again—“Speak, O Lord, for Thy Servant hears!” The
dreamer uses these words really in an inverse sense, namely, in order to
produce God with them. With that she directs her desires, her libido,
into the depths of her unconscious.

We know that, although individuals are widely separated by the
differences in the contents of their consciousness, they are closely
alike in their unconscious psychology. It is a significant impression
for one working in practical psychoanalysis when he realizes how uniform
are the typical unconscious complexes. Difference first arises from
individualization. This fact gives to an essential portion of the
Schopenhauer and Hartmann philosophies a deep psychologic
justification.[349] The very evident uniformity of the unconscious
mechanism serves as a psychologic foundation for these philosophic
views. The unconscious contains the differentiated remnants of the
earlier psychologic functions overcome by the individual
differentiation. The reaction and products of the animal psyche are of a
generally diffused uniformity and solidity, which, among men, may be
discovered apparently only in traces. Man appears as something
extraordinarily individual in contrast with animals.

This might be a tremendous delusion, because we have the appropriate
tendency always to recognize only the difference of things. This is
demanded by the psychologic adaptation which, without the most minute
differentiation of the impressions, would be absolutely impossible. In
opposition to this tendency we have ever the greatest difficulty in
recognizing in their common relations the things with which we are
occupied in every-day life. This recognition becomes much easier with
things which are more remote from us. For example, it is almost
impossible for a European to differentiate the faces in a Chinese
throng, although the Chinese have just as individual facial formations
as the Europeans, but the similarity of their strange facial expression
is much more evident to the remote onlooker than their individual
differences. But when we live among the Chinese then the impression of
their uniformity disappears more and more, and finally the Chinese
become individuals also. Individuality belongs to those conditional
actualities which are greatly overrated theoretically on account of
their practical significance. It does not belong to those overwhelmingly
clear and therefore universally obtrusive general facts upon which a
science must primarily be founded. The individual content of
consciousness is, therefore, the most unfavorable object imaginable for
psychology, because it has veiled the universally valid until it has
become unrecognizable. The essence of consciousness is the process of
adaptation which takes place in the most minute details. On the other
hand, the unconscious is the generally diffused, which not only binds
the individuals among themselves to the race, but also unites them
backwards with the peoples of the past and their psychology. Thus the
unconscious, surpassing the individual in its generality, is, in the
first place, the object of a true psychology, which claims not to be
psychophysical.

Man as an individual is a suspicious phenomenon, the right of whose
existence from a natural biological standpoint could be seriously
contested, because, from this point of view, the individual is only a
race atom, and has a significance only as a mass constituent. The
ethical standpoint, however, gives to the human being an individual
tendency separating him from the mass, which, in the course of
centuries, led to the development of personality, hand in hand with
which developed the hero cult, and has led to the modern individualistic
cult of personages. The attempts of rationalistic theology to keep hold
of the personal Jesus as the last and most precious remnant of the
divinity which has vanished beyond the power of the imagination
corresponds to this tendency. In this respect the Roman Catholic Church
was more practical, because she met the general need of the visible, or
at least historically believed hero, through the fact that she placed
upon the throne of worship a small but clearly perceptible god of the
world, namely, the Roman Pope, the Pater patrum, and at the same time
the Pontifex Maximus of the invisible upper or inner God. The sensuous
demonstrability of God naturally supports the religious process of
introversion, because the human figure essentially facilitates the
transference, for it is not easy to imagine something lovable or
venerable in a spiritual being. This tendency, everywhere present, has
been secretly preserved in the rationalistic theology with its Jesus
historically insisted upon. This does not mean that men loved the
visible God; they love him, not as he is, for he is merely a man, and
when the pious wished to love humanity they could go to their neighbors
and their enemies to love them. Mankind wishes to love in God only their
ideas, that is to say, the ideas which they project into God. By that
they wish to love their unconscious, that is, that remnant of ancient
humanity and the centuries-old past in all people, namely, the common
property left behind from all development which is given to all men,
like the sunshine and the air. But in loving this inheritance they love
that which is common to all. Thus they turn back to the mother of
humanity, that is to say, to the spirit of the race, and regain in this
way something of that connection and of that mysterious and irresistible
power which is imparted by the feeling of belonging to the herd. It is
the problem of Antæus, who preserves his gigantic strength only through
contact with mother earth. This temporary withdrawal into one’s self,
which, as we have already seen, signifies a regression to the childish
bond to the parent, seems to act favorably, within certain limits, in
its effect upon the psychologic condition of the individual. It is in
general to be expected that the two fundamental mechanisms of the
psychoses, transference and introversion, are to a wide extent extremely
appropriate methods of normal reaction against complexes; transference
as a means of escaping from the complex into reality; introversion as a
means of detaching one’s self from reality through the complex.

After we have informed ourselves about the general purposes of prayer,
we are prepared to hear more about the vision of our dreamer. After the
prayer, “the head of a sphinx with an Egyptian headdress” appeared, only
to vanish quickly. Here the author was disturbed, so that for a moment
she awoke. This vision recalls the previously mentioned phantasy of the
Egyptian statue, whose rigid gesture is entirely in place here as a
phenomenon of the so-called functional category. The light stages of the
hypnosis are designated technically as “Engourdissement” (stiffening).
The word Sphinx in the whole civilized world signifies the same as
riddle: a puzzling creature who proposes riddles, like the Sphinx of
Oedipus, standing at the portal of his fate like a symbolic proclamation
of the inevitable. The Sphinx is a semi-theriomorphic representation of
that “mother image” which may be designated as the “terrible mother,” of
whom many traces are found in mythology. This interpretation is correct
for Oedipus. Here the question is opened. The objection will be raised
that nothing except the word “Sphinx” justifies the allusion to the
Sphinx of Oedipus. On account of the lack of subjective materials, which
in the Miller text are wholly lacking in regard to this vision, an
individual interpretation would also be excluded. The suggestion of an
“Egyptian” phantasy (Part I, Chapter II) is entirely insufficient to be
employed here. Therefore we are compelled, if we wish to venture at all
upon an understanding of this vision, to direct ourselves—perhaps in all
too daring a manner—to the available ethnographic material under the
assumption that the unconscious of the present-day man coins its symbols
as was done in the most remote past. The Sphinx, in its traditional
form, is a half-human, half-animal creature, which we must, in part,
interpret in the way that is applicable to such phantastic products. The
reader is directed to the deductions in the first part of this volume
where the theriomorphic representations of the libido were discussed.
This manner of representation is very familiar to the analyst, through
the dreams and phantasies of neurotics (and of normal men). The impulse
is readily represented as an animal, as a bull, horse, dog, etc. One of
my patients, who had questionable relations with women, and who began
the treatment with the fear, so to speak, that I would surely forbid him
his sexual adventures, dreamed that I (his physician) very skilfully
speared to the wall a strange animal, half pig, half crocodile. Dreams
swarm with such theriomorphic representations of the libido. Mixed
beings, such as are in this dream, are not rare. A series of very
beautiful illustrations, where especially the lower half of the animal
was represented theriomorphically, has been furnished by
Bertschinger.[350] The libido which was represented theriomorphically is
the “animal” sexuality which is in a repressed state. The history of
repression, as we have seen, goes back to the incest problem, where the
first motives for moral resistance against sexuality display themselves.
The objects of the repressed libido are, in the last degree, the images
of father and mother; therefore the theriomorphic symbols, in so far as
they do not symbolize merely the libido in general, have a tendency to
present father and mother (for example, father represented by a bull,
mother by a cow). From these roots, as we pointed out earlier, might
probably arise the theriomorphic attributes of the Divinity. In as far
as the repressed libido manifests itself under certain conditions, as
anxiety, these animals are generally of a horrible nature. In
consciousness we are attached by all sacred bonds to the mother; in the
dream she pursues us as a terrible animal. The Sphinx, mythologically
considered, is actually a fear animal, which reveals distinct traits of
a mother derivate. In the Oedipus legend the Sphinx is sent by Hera, who
hates Thebes on account of the birth of Bacchus; because Oedipus
conquers the Sphinx, which is nothing but fear of the mother, he must
marry Jocasta, his mother, for the throne and the hand of the widowed
queen of Thebes belonged to him who freed the land from the plague of
the Sphinx. The genealogy of the Sphinx is rich in allusions to the
problem touched upon here. She is a daughter of Echnida, a mixed being;
a beautiful maiden above, a hideous serpent below. This double creature
corresponds to the picture of the mother; above, the human, lovely and
attractive half; below, the horrible animal half, converted into a fear
animal through the incest prohibition. Echnida is derived from the
All-mother, the mother Earth, Gaea, who, with Tartaros, the personified
underworld (the place of horrors), brought her forth. Echnida herself is
the mother of all terrors, of the Chimaera, Scylla, Gorgo, of the
horrible Cerberus, of the Nemean Lion, and of the eagle who devoured the
liver of Prometheus; besides this she gave birth to a number of dragons.
One of her sons is Orthrus, the dog of the monstrous Geryon, who was
killed by Hercules. With this dog, her son, Echnida, in incestuous
intercourse, produced the Sphinx. These materials will suffice to
characterize that amount of libido which led to the Sphinx symbol. If,
in spite of the lack of subjective material, we may venture to draw an
inference from the Sphinx symbol of our author, we must say that the
Sphinx represents an original incestuous amount of libido detached from
the bond to the mother. Perhaps it is better to postpone this conclusion
until we have examined the following visions.

After Miss Miller had concentrated herself again, the vision developed
further:

  “Suddenly an Aztec appeared, absolutely clear in every detail; the
  hands spread open, with large fingers, the head in profile, armored,
  headdress similar to the feather ornaments of the American Indian. The
  whole was somewhat suggestive of Mexican sculpture.”

The ancient Egyptian character of the Sphinx is replaced here by
American antiquity—by the Aztec. The essential idea is neither Egypt nor
Mexico, for the two could not be interchanged; but it is the subjective
factor which the dreamer produces from her own past. I have frequently
observed in the analysis of Americans that certain unconscious
complexes, i.e. repressed sexuality, are represented by the symbol of a
Negro or an Indian; for example, when a European tells in his dream,
“Then came a ragged, dirty individual,” for Americans and for those who
live in the tropics it is a Negro. When with Europeans it is a vagabond
or a criminal, with Americans it is a Negro or an Indian which
represents the individual’s own repressed sexual personality, and the
one considered inferior. It is also desirable to go into the particulars
of this vision, as there are various things worthy of notice. The
feather cap, which naturally had to consist of eagles’ feathers, is a
sort of magic charm. The hero assumes at the same time something of the
sun-like character of this bird when he adorns himself with its
feathers, just as the courage and strength of the enemy are appropriated
in swallowing his heart or taking his scalp. At the same time, the
feather crest is a crown which is equivalent to the rays of the sun. The
historical importance of the Sun identification has been seen in the
first part.[351]

Especial interest attaches to the hand, which is described as “open,”
and the fingers, which are described as “large.” It is significant that
it is the hand upon which the distinct emphasis falls. One might rather
have expected a description of the facial expression. It is well known
that the gesture of the hand is significant; unfortunately, we know
nothing about that here. Nevertheless, a parallel phantasy might be
mentioned, which also puts the emphasis upon hands. A patient in a
hypnagogic condition saw his mother painted on a wall, like a painting
in a Byzantine church. She held one hand up, open wide, with fingers
spread apart. The fingers were very large, swollen into knobs on the
ends, and each surrounded by a small halo. The immediate association
with this picture was the fingers of a frog with sucking discs at the
ends. Then the similarity to the penis. The ancient setting of this
mother picture is also of importance. Evidently the hand had, in this
phantasy, a phallic meaning. This interpretation was confirmed by a
further very remarkable phantasy of the same patient. He saw something
like a “sky-rocket” ascending from his mother’s hand, which at a closer
survey becomes a shining bird with golden wings, a golden pheasant, as
it then occurs to his mind. We have seen in the previous chapter that
the hand has actually a phallic, generative meaning, and that this
meaning plays a great part in the production of fire. In connection with
this phantasy, there is but one observation to make: fire was bored with
the hand; therefore it comes from the hand; Agni, the fire, was
worshipped as a golden-winged bird.[352] It is extremely significant
that it is the mother’s hand. I must deny myself the temptation to enter
more deeply into this. Let it be sufficient to have pointed out the
possible significance of the hand of the Aztec by means of these
parallel hand phantasies. We have mentioned the mother suggestively with
the Sphinx. The Aztec taking the place of the Sphinx points, through his
suggestive hand, to parallel phantasies in which the phallic hand really
belongs to the mother. Likewise we encounter an antique setting in
parallel phantasies. The significance of the antique, which experience
has shown to be the symbol for “infantile,” is confirmed by Miss Miller
in this connection in the annotation to her phantasies, for she says:

  “In my childhood, I took a special interest in the Aztec fragments and
  in the history of Peru and of the Incas.”

Through the two analyses of children which have been published we have
attained an insight into the child’s small world, and have seen what
burning interests and questions secretly surround the parents, and that
the parents are, for a long time, the objects of the greatest
interest.[353] We are, therefore, justified in suspecting that the
antique setting applies to the “ancients,” that is to say, the parents,
and that consequently this Aztec has something of the father or mother
in himself. Up to this time indirect hints point only to the mother,
which is nothing remarkable in an American girl, because Americans, as a
result of the extreme detachment from the father, are characterized by a
most enormous mother complex, which again is connected with the especial
social position of woman in the United States. This position brings
about a special masculinity among capable women, which easily makes
possible the symbolizing into a masculine figure.[354]

After this vision, Miss Miller felt that a name formed itself “bit by
bit,” which seemed to belong to this Aztec—“the son of an Inca of Peru.”
The name is “Chi-wan-to-pel.” As the author intimated, something similar
to this belonged to her childish reminiscences. The act of naming is,
like baptism, something exceedingly important for the creation of a
personality, because, since olden times, a magic power has been
attributed to the name, with which, for example, the spirit of the dead
can be conjured. To know the name of any one means, in mythology, to
have power over that one. As a well-known example I mention the fairy
tale of “Rumpelstilzchen.” In an Egyptian myth, Isis robs the Sun god Rê
permanently of his power by compelling him to tell her his real name.
Therefore, to give a name means to give power, invest with a definite
personality.[355] The author observed, in regard to the name itself,
that it reminded her very much of the impressive name Popocatepetl, a
name which belongs to unforgettable school memories, and, to the
greatest indignation of the patient, very often emerges in an analysis
in a dream or phantasy and brings with it that same old joke which one
heard in school, told oneself and later again forgot. Although one might
hesitate to consider this unhallowed joke as of psychologic importance,
still one must inquire for the reason of its being. One must also put,
as a counter question, Why is it always Popocatepetl and not the
neighboring Iztaccihuatl, or the even higher and just as clear Orizaba?
The last has certainly the more beautiful and more easily pronounced
name. Popocatepetl is impressive because of its onomatopoetic name. In
English the word is “to pop” (popgun), which is here considered as
onomatopoesy; in German the words are _Hinterpommern_, _Pumpernickel_;
_Bombe_; _Petarde_ (_le pet_ = flatus). The frequent German word _Popo_
(Podex) does not indeed exist in English, but flatus is designated as
“to poop” in childish speech. The act of defecation is often designated
as “to pop.” A joking name for the posterior part is “the bum.” (Poop
also means the rear end of a ship.) In French, _pouf!_ is onomatopoetic;
_pouffer_ = _platzen_ (to explode), _la poupe_ = rear end of ship, _le
poupard_ = the baby in arms, _la poupée_ = doll. _Poupon_ is a pet name
for a chubby-faced child. In Dutch _pop_, German _Puppe_ and Latin
_puppis_ = doll; in Plautus, however, it is also used jokingly for the
posterior part of the body; _pupus_ means child; _pupula_ = girl, little
dollie. The Greek word ποππύζω designates a cracking, snapping or
blowing sound. It is used of kissing; by Theocritus also of the
associated noise of flute blowing. The etymologic parallels show a
remarkable relationship between the part of the body in question and the
child. This relationship we will mention here, only to let it drop at
once, as this question will claim our attention later.

One of my patients in his childhood had always connected the act of
defecation with a phantasy that his posterior was a volcano and a
violent eruption took place, explosion of gases and gushings forth of
lava. The terms for the elemental occurrences of nature are originally
not at all poetical; one thinks, for example, of the beautiful
phenomenon of the meteor, which the German language most unpoetically
calls “Sternschnuppe” (the smouldering wick of a star). Certain South
American Indians call the shooting star the “urine of the stars.”
According to the principle of the least resistance, expressions are
taken from the nearest source available. (For example, the transference
of the metonymic expression of urination as _Schiffens_, “to rain.”)

Now it seems to be very obscure why the mystical figure of Chiwantopel,
whom Miss Miller, in a note, compares to the control spirit of the
spiritualistic medium,[356] is found in such a disreputable neighborhood
that his nature (name) was brought into relation with this particular
part of the body. In order to understand this possibility, we must
realize that when we produce from the unconscious the first to be
brought forth is the infantile material long lost in memory. One must,
therefore, take the point of view of that time in which this infantile
material was still on the surface. If now a much-honored object is
related in the unconscious to the anus, then one must conclude that
something of a high valuation was expressed thereby. The question is
only whether this corresponds to the psychology of the child. Before we
enter upon this question, it must be stated that the anal region is very
closely connected with veneration. One thinks of the traditional fæces
of the Great Mogul. An Oriental tale has the same to say of Christian
knights, who anointed themselves with the excrement of the pope and
cardinals in order to make themselves formidable. A patient who is
characterized by a special veneration for her father had a phantasy that
she saw her father sitting upon the toilet in a dignified manner, and
people going past greeted him effusively.[357] The association of the
anal relations by no means excludes high valuation or esteem, as is
shown by these examples, and as is easily seen from the intimate
connection of fæces and gold.[358] Here the most worthless comes into
the closest relation with the most valuable. This also happens in
religious valuations. I discovered (at that time to my great
astonishment) that a young patient, very religiously trained,
represented in a dream the Crucified on the bottom of a blue-flowered
chamber pot, namely, in the form of excrements. The contrast is so
enormous that one must assume that the valuations of childhood must
indeed be very different from ours. This is actually the truth. Children
bring to the act of defecation and the products of this an esteem and
interest[359] which later on is possible only to the hypochondriac. We
do not comprehend this interest until we learn that the child very early
connects with it a theory of propagation.[360] The libido afflux
probably accounts for the enormous interest in this act. The child sees
that this is the way in which something is produced, in which something
comes out. The same child whom I reported in the little brochure “Über
Konflikte der kindlichen Seele,” and who had a well-developed anal
theory of birth, like little Hans, whom Freud made known to us, later
contracted a habit of staying a long time on the toilet. Once the father
grew impatient, went to the toilet and called, “Do come out of there;
what are you making?” Whereupon the answer came from within, “A little
wagon and two ponies.” The child was making a little wagon and two
ponies, that is to say, things which at that time she especially wished
for. In this way one can make what one wishes, and the thing made is the
thing wished for. The child wishes earnestly for a doll or, at heart,
for a real child. (That is, the child practised for his future
biological task, and in the way in which everything in general is
produced he made the doll[361] himself as representative of the child or
of the thing wished for in general.[362]) From a patient I have learned
a parallel phantasy of her childhood. In the toilet there was a crevice
in the wall. She phantasied that from this crevice a fairy would come
out and present her with everything for which she wished. The “locus” is
known to be the place of dreams where much was wished for and created
which later would no longer be suspected of having this place of origin.
A pathological phantasy in place here is told us by Lombroso,[363]
concerning two insane artists. Each of them considered himself God and
the ruler of the world. They created or produced the world by making it
come forth from the rectum, just as the egg of birds originates in the
egg canal. One of these two artists was endowed with a true artistic
sense. He painted a picture in which he was just in the act of creation;
the world came forth from his anus; the membrum was in full erection; he
was naked, surrounded by women, and with all insignia of his power. The
excrement is in a certain sense the thing wished for, and on that
account it receives the corresponding valuation. When I first understood
this connection, an observation made long ago, and which disturbed me
greatly because I never rightly understood it, became clear to me. It
concerned an educated patient who, under very tragic circumstances, had
to be separated from her husband and child, and was brought into the
insane asylum. She exhibited a typical apathy and slovenliness which was
considered as affective mental deterioration. Even at that time I
doubted this deterioration, and was inclined to regard it as a secondary
adjustment. I took especial pains to ascertain how I could discover the
existence of the affect in this case. Finally, after more than three
hours’ hard work, I succeeded in finding a train of thought which
suddenly brought the patient into a completely adequate and therefore
strongly emotional state. At this moment the affective connection with
her was completely reëstablished. That happened in the forenoon. When I
returned at the appointed time in the evening to the ward to see her she
had, for my reception, smeared herself from head to foot with excrement,
and cried laughingly, “Do I please you so?” She had never done that
before; it was plainly destined for me. The impression which I received
was one of a personal affront and, as a result of this, I was convinced
for years after of the affective deterioration of such cases. Now we
understand this act as an infantile ceremony of welcome or a declaration
of love.

The origin of Chiwantopel, that is to say, an unconscious personality,
therefore means, in the sense of the previous explanation, “I make,
produce, invent him myself.” It is a sort of human creation or birth by
the anal route. The first people were made from excrement, potter’s
earth, or clay. The Latin _lutum_, which really means “moistened earth,”
also has the transferred meaning of dirt. In Plautus it is even a term
of abuse, something like “You scum.” The birth from the anus also
reminds us of the motive of “throwing behind oneself.” A well-known
example is the oracular command, which Deucalion and Pyrrha, who were
the only survivors from the great flood, received. They were to throw
behind them the bones of the great mother. They then threw behind them
stones, from which mankind sprang. According to a tradition, the Dactyli
in a similar manner sprang from dust, which the nymph Anchiale threw
behind her. There is also humorous significance attached to the anal
products. The excrements are often considered in popular humor as a
monument or memorial (which plays a special part in regard to the
criminal in the form of _grumus merdæ_); every one knows the humorous
story of the man who, led by the spirit through labyrinthian passages to
a hidden treasure, after he had shed all his pieces of clothing,
deposited excrement as a last guide post on his road. In a more distant
past a sign of this kind possessed as great a significance as the dung
of animals to indicate the direction taken. Simple monuments (“little
stone figures”) have taken the place of this perishable mark.

It is noteworthy that Miss Miller quotes another case, where a name
suddenly obtruded itself, parallel to the emerging into consciousness of
Chiwantopel, namely, A-ha-ma-ra-ma, with the feeling that it dealt with
something Assyrian.[364] As a possible source of this, there occurred to
her “Asurabama, who made cuneiform bricks,”[365] those imperishable
documents made from clay: the monuments of the most ancient history. If
it were not emphasized that the bricks are “cuneiform,” then it might
mean ambiguously “wedged-shaped bricks,” which is more suggestive of our
interpretation than that of the author.

Miss Miller remarks that besides the name “Asurabama” she also thought
of “Ahasuerus” or “Ahasverus.” This phantasy leads to a very different
aspect of the problem of the unconscious personality. While the previous
materials betrayed to us something of the infantile theory of creation,
this phantasy opens up a vista into the dynamics of the unconscious
creation of personality. Ahasver is, as is well known, the Wandering
Jew; he is characterized by endless and restless wanderings until the
end of the world. The fact that the author has thought of this
particular name justifies us in following this trail. The legend of
Ahasver, the first literary traces of which belong to the thirteenth
century, seems to be of Occidental origin, and belongs to those ideas
which possess indestructible vital energy. The figure of the Wandering
Jew has undergone more literary elaboration than the figure of Faust,
and nearly all of this work belongs to the last century. If the figure
is not called Ahasver, still it is there under another name, perhaps as
Count of St. Germain, the mysterious Rosicrucian, whose immortality was
assured, and whose temporary residence (the land) was equally
known.[366] Although the stories about Ahasver cannot be traced back any
earlier than the thirteenth century, the oral tradition can reach back
considerably further, and it is not an impossibility that a bridge to
the Orient exists. There is the parallel figure of Chidr, or “al
Chadir,” the “ever-youthful Chidher” celebrated in song by Rueckert. The
legend is purely Islamitic. The peculiar feature, however, is that
Chidher is not only a saint, but in Sufic circles[367] rises even to
divine significance. In view of the severe monotheism of Islam, one is
inclined to think of Chidher as a pre-Islamitic Arabian divinity who
would hardly be officially recognized by the new religion, but might
have been tolerated on political grounds. But there is nothing to prove
that. The first traces of Chidher are found in the commentaries of the
Koran, Buchâri and Tabare and in a commentary to a noteworthy passage of
the eighteenth sura of the Koran. The eighteenth sura is entitled “the
cave,” that is, after the cave of the seven sleepers, who, according to
the legend, slept there for 309 years, and thus escaped persecution, and
awoke in a new era. Their legend is recounted in the eighteenth sura,
and divers reflections were associated with it. The wish-fulfilment idea
of the legend is very clear. The mystic material for it is the immutable
model of the Sun’s course. The Sun sets periodically, but does not die.
It hides in the womb of the sea or in a subterranean cave,[368] and in
the morning is “born again,” complete. The language in which this
astronomic occurrence is clothed is one of clear symbolism; the Sun
returns into the mother’s womb, and after some time is again born. Of
course, this event is properly an incestuous act, of which, in
mythology, clear traces are still retained, not the least of which is
the circumstance that the dying and resurrected gods are the lovers of
their own mothers or have generated themselves through their own
mothers. Christ as the “God becoming flesh” has generated himself
through Mary; Mithra has done the same. These Gods are unmistakable
Sun-gods, for the Sun also does this, in order to again renew himself.
Naturally, it is not to be assumed that astronomy came first and these
conceptions of gods afterwards; the process was, as always, inverted,
and it is even true that primitive magic charms of rebirth, baptism,
superstitious usages of all sorts, concerning the cure of the sick,
etc., were projected into the heavens. These youths were born from the
cave (the womb of mother earth), like the Sun-gods, in a new era, and
this was the way they vanquished death. In this far they were immortal.
It is now interesting to see how the Koran comes, after long ethical
contemplations in the course of the same sura, to the following passage,
which is of especial significance for the origin of the Chidher myth.
For this reason I quote the Koran literally:

  “Remember when Moses said to his servant, ‘I will not stop till I
  reach the confluence of the two seas, or for eighty years will I
  journey on.’

  “But when they reached their confluence they forgot their fish, and it
  took its way in the sea at will.

  “And when they had passed on, Moses said to his servant, ‘Bring us our
  morning meal, for now we have incurred weariness from this our
  journey.’

  “He said, ‘What thinkest thou? When we repaired to the rock for rest,
  then verily I forgot the fish; and none but Satan made me forget it,
  so as not to mention it; and it hath taken its way in the sea in a
  wondrous sort.’

  “He said, ‘It is this we were in quest of.’ So they both went back
  retracing their footsteps.

  “Then found they one of our servants to whom we had vouchsafed our
  mercy, and whom we had instructed with our knowledge;[369]

  “Moses said to him, ‘Shall I follow thee that thou teach me, for
  guidance of that which thou hast been taught?’

  “He said, ‘Verily, thou canst by no means have patience with me; and
  how canst thou be patient in matters whose meaning thou comprehendest
  not?’”—Trans. Rodwell, page 188.

Moses now accompanies the mysterious servant of God, who does divers
things which Moses cannot comprehend; finally, the Unknown takes leave
of Moses, and speaks to him as follows:

  “They will ask thee of Dhoulkarnein (the two-horned).[370] Say: ‘I
  will recite to you an account of him.’

  “Verily, we established his power upon the earth and we gave him a
  means to accomplish every end, so he followed his way;

  “Until when he reached the setting of the sun, he found it to set in a
  miry forest; and hard by, he found a people....”

Now follows a moral reflection; then the narrative continues:

  “Then he followed his course further until he came to the place where
  the sun rises....”

If now we wish to know who is the unknown servant of God, we are told in
this passage _he is Dhulqarnein, Alexander, the Sun; he goes to the
place of setting and he goes to the place of rising_. The passage about
the unknown servant of God is explained by the commentaries in a
well-defined legend. The servant is Chidher, “the verdant one,” the
never-tiring wanderer, who roams for hundreds and thousands of years
over lands and seas, the teacher and counsellor of pious men; the one
wise in divine knowledge—the immortal.[371] The authority of the Tabari
associates Chidher with Dhulqarnein; Chidher is said to have reached the
“stream of life” as a follower of Alexander, and both unwittingly had
drunk of it, so that they became immortal. Moreover, _Chidher is
identified by the old commentators with Elias_, who also did not die,
but _who was taken to Heaven in a fiery chariot_. Elias is
_Helios_.[372] It is to be observed that Ahasver also owes his existence
to an obscure place in the holy Christian scriptures. This place is to
be found in Matthew xvi:28. First comes the scene where Christ appoints
Peter as the rock of his church, and nominates him the governor of his
power.[373] After that follows the prophecy of his death, and then comes
the passage:

  “Verily, I say unto you, there be some standing here, which shall not
  taste of death till they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.”

Here follows the scene of the transfiguration:

  “And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun,
  and his raiment was white as the light.

  “And behold there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.

  “Then answered Peter and said unto Jesus, ‘Lord, it is good for us to
  be here; if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for
  thee and one for Moses and one for Elias.’”[374]

From these passages it appears that Christ stands on the same plane as
Elias, without being identified with him,[375] although the people
consider him as Elias. The ascension places Christ as identical with
Elias. The prophecy of Christ shows that there exist aside from himself
one or more immortals who shall not die until Parousai. According to
John xxi: 22nd verse, the boy John was considered as one of these
immortals, and in the legend he is, in fact, not dead but merely
sleeping in the ground until Parousai, and breathes so that the dust
swirls round his grave.[376] As is evident, there are passable bridges
from Christ by way of Elias to Chidher and Ahasuerus. It is said in an
account of this legend[377] that Dhulqarnein led his friend Chidher to
the “source of life” in order to have him drink of immortality.[378]
Alexander also bathed in the stream of life and performed the ritual
ablutions. As I previously mentioned in a footnote, according to Matthew
xvii: 12th verse, John the Baptist is Elias, therefore primarily
identical with Chidher. Now, however, it is to be noted that in the
Arabian legend Chidher appears rather as a companion or accompanied
(Chidher with Dhulqarnein or with Elias, “like unto them”; or identified
with them[379]). There are therefore, two similar figures who resemble
each other, but who, nevertheless, are distinct. The analogous situation
in the Christian legend is found in the scene by the Jordan where John
leads Christ to the “source of life.” Christ is there, the subordinate,
John the superior, similar to Dhulqarnein and Chidher, or Chidher and
Moses, also Elias. The latter relation especially is such that Vollers
compares Chidher and Elias, on the one side, with Gilgamesh and his
mortal brother Eabani; on the other side, with the Dioscuri, one of whom
is immortal, the other mortal. This relation is also found in Christ and
John the Baptist,[380] on the one hand, and Christ and Peter, on the
other. The last-named parallel only finds its explanation through
comparison with the Mithraic mysteries, where the esoteric contents are
revealed to us through monuments. Upon the Mithraic marble relief of
Klagenfurt[381] it is represented how with a halo Mithra crowns Helios,
who either kneels before him or else floats up to him from below. Mithra
is represented on a Mithraic monument of Osterburken as holding in his
right hand the shoulder of the mystic ox above Helios, who stands bowed
down before him, the left hand resting on a sword hilt. A crown lies
between them on the ground. Cumont observes about this scene that it
probably represents the divine prototype of the ceremony of the
initiation into the degree of Miles, in which a sword and a crown were
conferred upon the mystic. Helios is, therefore, appointed the Miles of
Mithra. In a general way, Mithra seems to occupy the rôle of patron to
Helios, which reminds us of the boldness of Hercules towards Helios.
Upon his journey towards Geryon, Helios burns too hotly; Hercules, full
of anger, threatens him with his never-failing arrows. Therefore, Helios
is compelled to yield, and lends to the hero his Sun ship, with which he
was accustomed to journey across the sea. Thus Hercules returns to
Erythia, to the cattle herds of Geryon.[382] On the monument at
Klagenfurt, Mithra is furthermore represented pressing Helios’s hand,
either in farewell or as a ratification. In a further scene Mithra
mounts the Chariot of Helios, either for the ascension or the “Sea
Journey.”[383] Cumont is of the opinion that Mithra gives to Helios a
sort of ceremonious investiture and consecrates him with his divine
power by crowning him with his own hands. This relation corresponds to
that of Christ to Peter. Peter, through his symbol, the cock, has the
character of a sun-god. After the ascension (or sea journey) of Christ,
he is the visible pontiff of the divinity; he suffers, therefore, the
same death (crucifixion) as Christ, and becomes the great Roman deity
(_Sol invictus_), the conquering, triumphant Church itself, embodied in
the Pope. In the scene of Malchus he is always shown as the miles of
Christ, to whom the sword is granted, and as the rock upon which the
Church is founded. The crown[384] is also given to him who possesses the
power to bind and to set free. Thus, Christ, like the Sun, is the
visible God, whereas the Pope, like the heir of the Roman Cæsars, is
_solis invicti comes_. The setting sun appoints a successor whom he
invests with the power of the sun.[385] Dhulqarnein gives Chidher
eternal life. Chidher communicates his wisdom to Moses.[386] There even
exists a report according to which the forgetful servant of Joshua
drinks from the well of life, whereupon he becomes immortal, and is
placed in a ship by Chidher and Moses, as a punishment, and is cast out
to sea, once more a fragment of a sun myth, the motive of the “sea
journey.”[387]

The primitive symbol, which designates that portion of the Zodiac in
which the Sun, with the Winter Solstice, again enters upon the yearly
course, is the goat, fish sign, the αἰγωκέρως. The Sun mounts like a
goat to the highest mountain, and later goes into the water as a fish.
The fish is the symbol of the child,[388] for the child before his birth
lives in the water like a fish, and the Sun, because it plunges into the
sea, becomes equally child and fish. The fish, however, is also a
phallic symbol,[389] also a symbol for the woman.[390] Briefly stated,
the fish is a libido symbol, and, indeed, as it seems predominately _for
the renewal of the libido_.

The journey of Moses with his servant is a life-journey (eighty years).
They grow old and lose their life force (libido), that is, they lose the
fish which “pursues its course in a marvellous manner to the sea,” which
means the setting of the sun. When the two notice their loss, they
discover at the place where the “source of life” is found (where the
dead fish revived and sprang into the sea) Chidher wrapped in his
mantle,[391] sitting on the ground. According to another version, he sat
on an island in the sea, or “in the wettest place on earth,” that is, he
was just _born from the maternal depths_. Where the fish vanished
Chidher, “the verdant one,” was born as a “son of the deep waters,” his
head veiled, a Cabir, a proclaimer of divine wisdom; the old Babylonian
Oannes-Ea, who was represented in the form of a fish, and daily came
from the sea as a fish to teach the people wisdom.[392] His name was
brought into connection with John’s. With the rising of the renewed sun
all that lived in darkness, as water-animal or fish, surrounded by all
terrors of night and death,[393] became as the shining fiery firmament
of the day. Thus the words of John the Baptist[394] gain especial
meaning:

  “I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that cometh
  after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; he
  shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire.”

With Vollers we may also compare Chidher and Elias (Moses and his
servant Joshua) with Gilgamesh and his brother Eabani. Gilgamesh
wandered through the world, driven by anxiety and longing, to find
immortality. His path led him across the seas to the wise Utnapishtim
(Noah), who knew how to cross the waters of death. There Gilgamesh had
to dive down to the bottom of the sea for the magical herb which was to
lead him back to the land of men. When he had come again to his native
land a serpent stole the magic plant from him (the fish again slid into
the sea). But on the return from the land of the blessed an immortal
mariner accompanied him, who, banished by a curse of Utnapishtim, was
forbidden to return to the land of the blessed. Gilgamesh’s journey had
lost its purpose on account of the loss of the magic herb; instead he is
accompanied by an immortal, whose fate, indeed, we cannot learn from the
fragments of the epic. This banished immortal is the model for Ahasver,
as Jensen[395] aptly remarked.

Again we encounter the motive of the Dioscuri, mortal and immortal,
setting and rising sun. This _motive is also represented as if projected
from the hero_.

The Sacrificium Mithriacum (the sacrifice of the bull) is in its
religious representation very often flanked by the two Dadophores,
Cautes and Cautopates, one with a raised and the other with a lowered
torch. They represent brothers who reveal their character through the
symbolic position of the torch. Cumont connects them, not without
meaning, with the sepulchral “erotes” who as genii with the reversed
torches have traditional meaning. The one is supposed to stand for death
and the other for life. I cannot refrain from mentioning the similarity
between the Sacrificium Mithriacum (where the sacrificed bull in the
centre is flanked on both sides by Dadophores) to the Christian
sacrifice of the lamb (ram). The Crucified is also traditionally flanked
by the two thieves, one of whom ascends to Paradise, while the other
descends to Hell.[396] The idea of the mortal and the immortal seems to
have passed also into the Christian worship. Semitic gods are often
represented as flanked by two Paredroi; for example, Baal of Edessa,
accompanied by Aziz and Monimoz (Baal as the Sun, accompanied by Mars
and Mercury, as expressed in astronomical teachings). According to the
Chaldean view, the gods are grouped into triads. In this circle of ideas
belongs also the Trinity, the idea of the triune God, in which Christ
must be considered in his unity with the Father and the Holy Ghost. So,
too, do the two thieves belong inwardly to Christ. The two Dadophores
are, as Cumont points out, nothing but offshoots[397] from the chief
figure of Mithra, to whom belongs a mysterious threefold character.
According to an account of Dionysus Areopagita, the magicians celebrated
a festival, “τοῦ τριπλασίου Μίθρου.”[398][399] An observation likewise
referring to the Trinity is made by Plutarch concerning Ormuzd: τρὶς
ἑαυτὸν αὐξήσας ἀπέστησε τοῦ ἡλίου.[400] The Trinity, as three different
states of the unity, is also a Christian thought. In the very first
place this suggests a sun myth. An observation by Macrobius 1:18 seems
to lend support to this idea:

  “Hæ autem ætatum diversitates ad solem referuntur, ut parvulus
  videatur hiemali solstitio, qualem Aegyptii proferunt ex adyto die
  certa, ... æquinoctio vernali figura iuvenis ornatur. Postea statuitur
  ætas ejus plenissima effigie barbæ solstitio æstivo ... exunde per
  diminutiones veluti senescenti quarta forma deus figuratur.”[401][402]

As Cumont observes, Cautes and Cautapates occasionally carry in their
hands the head of a bull, and a scorpion.[403] Taurus and Scorpio are
equinoctial signs, which clearly indicate that the sacrificial scene
refers primarily to the Sun cycle; the rising Sun, which sacrifices
itself at the summer solstice, and the setting Sun. In the sacrificial
scene the symbol of the rising and setting Sun was not easily
represented; therefore, this idea was removed from the sacrificial
image.

We have pointed out above that the Dioscuri represent a similar idea,
although in a somewhat different form; the one sun is always mortal, the
other immortal. As this entire sun mythology is merely a psychologic
projection to the heavens, the fundamental thesis probably is as
follows; just as man consists of a mortal and immortal part, so the sun
is a pair of brothers,[404] one being mortal, the other immortal. This
thought lies at the basis of all theology in general. Man is, indeed,
mortal, but there are some who are immortal, or there is something in us
which is immortal. Thus the gods, “a Chidher or a St. Germain,” are our
immortal part, which, though incomprehensible, dwells among us
somewhere.

Comparison with the sun teaches us over and over again that the gods are
libido. It is that part of us which is immortal, since it represents
that bond through which we feel that in the race we are never
extinguished.[405] It is life from the life of mankind. Its springs,
which well up from the depths of the unconscious, come, as does our life
in general, from the root of the whole of humanity, since we are indeed
only a twig broken off from the mother and transplanted.

Since the divine in us is the libido,[406] we must not wonder that we
have taken along with us in our theology ancient representations from
olden times, which give the triune figure to the God. We have taken this
τριπλάσιον Θεόν[407] from the phallic symbolism, the originality of
which may well be uncontested.[408] The male genitals are the basis for
this Trinity. It is an anatomical fact that one testicle is generally
placed somewhat higher than the other, and it is also a very old, but,
nevertheless, still surviving, superstition that one testicle generates
a boy and the other a girl.[409] A late Babylonian bas-relief from
Lajard’s[410] collection seems to be in accordance with this view. In
the middle of the image stands an androgynous god (masculine and
feminine face[411]); upon the right, male side, is found a serpent, with
a sun halo round its head; upon the left, female side, there is also a
serpent, with the moon above its head. Above the head of the god there
are three stars. This ensemble would seem to confirm the Trinity[412] of
the representation. The Sun serpent at the right side is male; the
serpent at the left side is female (signified by the moon). This image
possesses a symbolic sexual suffix, which makes the sexual significance
of the whole obtrusive. Upon the male side a rhomb is found—a favorite
symbol of the female genitals; upon the female side there is a wheel or
felly. A wheel always refers to the Sun, but the spokes are thickened
and enlarged at the ends, which suggests phallic symbolism. It seems to
be a phallic wheel, which was not unknown in antiquity. There are
obscene bas-reliefs where Cupid turns a wheel of nothing but
phalli.[413] It is not only the serpent which suggests the phallic
significance of the Sun; I quote one especially marked case, from an
abundance of proof. In the antique collection at Verona I discovered a
late Roman mystic inscription in which are the following
representations:

[Illustration]

These symbols are easily read: Sun—Phallus, Moon—Vagina (Uterus). This
interpretation is confirmed by another figure of the same collection.
There the same representation is found, only the vessel[414] is replaced
by the figure of a woman. The impressions on coins, where in the middle
a palm is seen encoiled by a snake, flanked by two stones (testicles),
or else in the middle a stone encircled by a snake; to the right a palm,
to the left a shell (female genitals[415]), should be interpreted in a
similar manner. In Lajard’s “Researches” (“The Cult of Venus”) there is
a coin of Perga, where Artemis of Perga is represented by a conical
stone (phallic) flanked by a man (claimed to be Men) and by a female
figure (claimed to be Artemis). Men (the so-called Lunus) is found upon
an Attic bas-relief apparently with the spear but fundamentally a
sceptre with a phallic significance, flanked by Pan with a club
(phallus) and a female figure.[416] The traditional representation of
the Crucified flanked by John and Mary is closely associated with this
circle of ideas, precisely as is the Crucified with the thieves. From
this we see how, beside the Sun, there emerges again and again the much
more primitive comparison of the libido with the phallus. An especial
trace still deserves mention here. The Dadophor Cautapates, who
represents Mithra, is also represented with the cock[417] and the
pineapple. But these are the attributes of the Phrygian god Men, whose
cult was widely diffused. Men was represented with Pileus,[418] the
pineapple and the cock, also in the form of a boy, just as the
Dadophores are boyish figures. (This last-named property relates them
with Men to the Cabiri.) Men has a very close connection with Attis, the
son and lover of Cybele. In the time of the Roman Cæsars, Men and Attis
were entirely identified, as stated above. Attis also wears the Pileus
like Men, Mithra and the Dadophores. As the son and lover of his mother
he again leads us to the source of this religion-creating incest libido,
namely, to the mother. Incest leads logically to ceremonial castration
in the Attic-Cybele cult, for the Hero, driven insane by his mother,
mutilates himself.[419] I must at present forego entering more deeply
into this matter, because the incest problem is to be discussed at the
close. Let this suggestion suffice—that from different directions the
analysis of the libido symbolism always leads back again to the mother
incest. Therefore, we may surmise that the longing of the libido raised
to God (repressed into the unconscious) is a primitive, incestuous one
which concerns the mother. Through renouncing the virility to the first
beloved, the mother, the feminine element becomes extremely predominant;
hence the strongly androgynous character of the dying and resurrected
Redeemer. That these heroes are nearly always wanderers[420] is a
psychologically clear symbolism. The wandering is a representation of
longing,[421] of the ever-restless desire, which nowhere finds its
object, for, unknown to itself, it seeks the lost mother. The wandering
association renders the Sun comparison easily intelligible; also, under
this aspect, the heroes always resemble the wandering Sun, which seems
to justify the fact that the myth of the hero is a sun myth. But the
myth of the hero, however, is, as it appears to me, the myth of our own
suffering unconscious, which has an unquenchable longing for all the
deepest sources of our own being; for the body of the mother, and
through it for communion with infinite life in the countless forms of
existence. Here I must introduce the words of the Master who has divined
the deepest roots of Faustian longings:

      “Unwilling, I reveal a loftier mystery.—
      In solitude are throned the Goddesses,
      No Space around them, Place and Time still less:
      Only to speak of them embarrasses.
      They are THE MOTHERS!

      “Goddesses unknown to ye,
      The Mortals,—named by us unwillingly.
      Delve in the deepest depths must thou to reach them:
      ’Tis thine own fault that we for help beseech them.

      “Where is the way?

                  “No way! To the Unreachable,
      Ne’er to be trodden! A way to the Unbeseechable,
      Never to be besought! Art thou prepared?
      There are no locks, no latches to be lifted!
      Through endless solitudes shalt thou be drifted!
      Hast thou through solitudes and deserts dared?
      And hadst thou swum to farthest verge of ocean
      And there the boundless space beheld,
      Still hadst thou seen wave after wave in motion,
      Even though impending doom thy fear compelled.
      Thou hadst seen something—in the beryl dim
      Of peace-lulled seas, the sportive dolphins swim;
      Hadst seen the flying clouds, sun, moon and star;
      Nought shalt thou see in endless Void afar—
      Not hear thy footstep fall, nor meet
      A stable spot to rest thy feet.

                “Here, take this key!
      The Key will scent the true place from all others;
      Follow it down! ‘Twill lead thee to the Mothers.

      “Descend then! I could also say: Ascend!
      ’Twere all the same. _Escape from the Created_
      To shapeless forms in liberated spaces!
      Enjoy what long ere this was dissipated!
      There whirls the press, like clouds on clouds unfolding;
      Then with stretched arm swing high the key thou’rt holding!

      “At last a blazing tripod,[422] tells thee this,
      That there the utterly deepest bottom is.
      Its light to thee will then the Mothers show,
      Some in their seats, the others stand or go,
      At their own will: Formation, Transformation,
      The Eternal Mind’s eternal recreation,
      Forms of all Creatures,—there are floating free.
      They’ll see thee not! for only wraiths they see.
      So pluck up heart,—the danger then is great.
      Go to the tripod ere thou hesitate,
      And touch it with the key.”




                               CHAPTER V
                 SYMBOLISM OF THE MOTHER AND OF REBIRTH


The vision following the creation of the hero is described by Miss
Miller as a “throng of people.” This representation is known to us from
dream interpretation as being, above all, the symbol of mystery.[423]
Freud thinks that this choice of symbol is determined on account of its
possibility of representing the idea. The bearer of the mystery is
placed in opposition to the multitude of the ignorant. _The possession
of the mystery cuts one off from intercourse with the rest of mankind._
For a very complete and smooth rapport with the surroundings is of great
importance for the management of the libido and the _possession of a
subjectively important secret generally creates a great disturbance_. It
may be said that the whole art of life shrinks to the one problem of how
the libido may be freed in the most harmless way possible. Therefore,
the neurotic derives special benefit in treatment when he can at last
rid himself of his various secrets. The symbol of the crowd of people,
chiefly the streaming and moving mass, is, as I have often seen,
substituted for the great excitement in the unconscious, especially in
persons who are outwardly calm.

The vision of the “throng” develops further; horses emerge; a battle is
fought. With Silberer, I might accept the significance of this vision as
belonging, first of all, in the “functional category,” because,
fundamentally, the conception of the intermingling crowds is nothing but
the symbol of the present onrush of the mass of thought; likewise the
battle, and possibly the horses, which illustrate the movement. The
deeper significance of the appearance of the horses will be seen for the
first time in the further course of our treatment of the mother
symbolism. The following vision has a more definite and significantly
important character. Miss Miller sees a City of Dreams (“Cité de
Rêves”). The picture is similar to one she saw a short time before on
the cover of a magazine. Unfortunately, we learn nothing further about
it. One can easily imagine under this “Cité de Rêves” a fulfilled wish
dream, that is to say, something very beautiful and greatly longed for;
a sort of heavenly Jerusalem, as the poet of the Apocalypse has dreamed
it. The city is a maternal symbol, a woman who fosters the inhabitants
as children. It is, therefore, intelligible that the two mother
goddesses, Rhea and Cybele, both wear the wall crown. The Old Testament
treats the cities of Jerusalem, Babel, etc., as women (_Isaiah_
xlvii:1–5):

  “Come down and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on
  the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans; for thou
  shalt no more be called tender and delicate. Take the millstones and
  grind meal; uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh,
  pass over the rivers. That thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy
  shame shall be seen; sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O
  daughter of the Chaldeans; for thou shalt no more be called the lady
  of the kingdoms.”

Jeremiah says of Babel (I:12):

  “Your mother shall be sore confounded; she that bare you shall be
  ashamed.”

Strong, unconquered cities are virgins; colonies are sons and daughters.
Cities are also whores. Isaiah says of Tyre (xxiii:16):

  “Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot; thou hast been
  forgotten.”

And:

  “How does it come to pass that the virtuous city has become an
  harlot?”

We come across a similar symbolism in the myth of Ogyges, the mythical
king who rules in Egyptian Thebes and whose wife was appropriately named
Thebe. The Bœotian Thebes founded by Cadmus received on that account a
surname, “Ogygian.” This surname was also given to the great flood, as
it was called “Ogygian” because it occurred under Ogyges. This
coincidence will be found later on to be hardly accidental. The fact
that the city and the wife of Ogyges bear the same name indicates that
somewhere a relation must exist between the city and the woman, which is
not difficult to understand, for the city is identical with the woman.
We meet a similar idea in Hindoo lore where Indra appears as the husband
of Urvara, but Urvara means “the fertile land.” In a similar way the
occupancy of a country by the king was understood as marriage with the
ploughed land. Similar representations must have prevailed in Europe as
well. Princes had to guarantee, for example, a good harvest at their
accession. The Swedish King Domaldi was actually killed on account of
the failure of the harvest (Ynglinga sâga 18). In the Rama sâga the hero
Rama marries Sîtâ, the furrow of the field.[424] To the same group of
ideas belongs the Chinese custom of the Emperor ploughing a furrow at
his ascension to the throne. This idea of the soil being feminine also
embraces the idea of continual companionship with the woman, a physical
communication. Shiva, the Phallic God, is, like Mahadeva and Parwati,
male and female. He has even given one-half of his body to his consort
Parwati as a dwelling place.[425] Inman[426] gives us a drawing of a
Pundite of Ardanari-Iswara; one-half of the god is masculine, the other
half feminine, and the genitals are in continuous cohabitation. The
motive of continuous cohabitation is expressed in a well-known lingam
symbol, which is to be found everywhere in Indian temples; the base is a
female symbol, and within that is the phallus.[427] The symbol
approaches very closely the Grecian mystic phallic basket and chests.
(Compare with this the Eleusinian mysteries.) The chest or box is here a
female symbol, that is, the mother’s womb. This is a very well-known
conception in the old mythologies.[428] The chest, basket or little
basket, with its precious contents, was thought of as floating on the
water; a remarkable inversion of the natural fact that the child floats
in the amniotic fluid and that this is in the uterus.

This inversion brings about a great advantage for sublimation, for it
creates enormous possibilities of application for the myth-weaving
phantasy, that is to say, for the annexation to the sun cycle. The Sun
floats over the sea like an immortal god, which every evening is
immersed in the maternal water and is born again renewed in the morning.
Frobenius says:

  “Perhaps in connection with the blood-red sunrise, the idea occurs
  that here a birth takes place, the birth of a young son; the question
  then arises inevitably, whence comes the paternity? How has the woman
  become pregnant? And since this woman symbolizes the same idea as the
  fish, which means the sea, (because we proceed from the assumption
  that the Sun descends into the sea as well as arises from it) thus the
  curious primitive answer is that this sea has previously swallowed the
  old Sun. Consequently the resulting myth is, that the woman (sea) has
  formerly devoured the Sun and now brings a new Sun into the world, and
  thus she has become pregnant.”

All these sea-going gods are sun symbols. They are enclosed in a chest
or an ark for the “night journey on the sea” (Frobenius), often together
with a woman (again an inversion of the actual situation, but in support
of the motive of continuous cohabitation, which we have met above).
During the night journey on the sea the Sun-god is enclosed in the
mother’s womb, oftentimes threatened by dangers of all kinds. Instead of
many individual examples, I will content myself with reproducing the
scheme which Frobenius has constructed from numberless myths of this
sort:

[Illustration: _To devour_ _West_ _East_ _W-E movement—(sea journey)_
_Heat-hair_ _To slip out_ _To open_ _To land_ _Sea journey_ _To set on
fire or To cut off the heart_]

Frobenius gives the following legend to illustrate this:

  “A hero is devoured by a water monster in the West (to devour). The
  animal carries him within him to the East (sea journey). Meanwhile, he
  kindles a fire in the belly of the monster (to set on fire) and since
  he feels hungry he cuts off a piece of the hanging heart (to cut off
  the heart). Soon after he notices that the fish glides upon the dry
  land (to land); he immediately begins to cut open the animal from
  within outwards (to open) then he slides out (to slip out). In the
  fish’s belly, it had been so hot, that all his hair had fallen out
  (heat-hair). The hero frequently frees all who were previously
  devoured (to devour all) and all now slide out (slip out).”

A very close parallel is Noah’s journey during the flood, in which all
living creatures die; only he and the life guarded by him are brought to
a new birth. In a Melapolynesian legend (Frobenius) it is told that the
hero in the belly of the King Fish took his weapon and cut open the
fish’s belly. “He slid out and saw a splendor, and he sat down and
reflected. ‘I wonder where I am,’ he said. Then the sun rose with a
bound and turned from one side to the other.” The Sun has again slipped
out. Frobenius mentions from the Ramayana the myth of the ape Hanuman,
who represents the Sun-hero. The sun in which Hanuman hurries through
the air throws a shadow upon the sea. The sea monster notices this and
through this draws Hanuman toward itself; when the latter sees that the
monster is about to devour him, he stretches out his figure
immeasurably; the monster assumes the same gigantic proportions. As he
does that Hanuman becomes as small as a thumb, slips into the great body
of the monster and comes out on the other side. In another part of the
poem it is said that he came out from the right ear of the monster (like
Rabelais’ Gargantua, who also was born from the mother’s ear). “Hanuman
thereupon resumes his flight, and finds a new obstacle in another sea
monster, which is the mother of Rahus, the sun-devouring demon. The
latter draws Hanuman’s shadow[429] to her in the same way. Hanuman again
has recourse to the earlier stratagem, becomes small and slips into her
body, but hardly is he there than he grows to a gigantic mass, swells
up, tears her, kills her, and in that way makes his escape.”

Thus we understand why the Indian fire-bringer Mâtariçvan is called “the
one swelling in the mother”; the ark (little box, chest, cask, vessel,
etc.) is a symbol of the womb, just as is the sea, into which the Sun
sinks for rebirth. From this circle of ideas we understand the
mythologic statements about Ogyges; he it is who possesses the mother,
the City, who is united with the mother; therefore under him came the
great flood, for it is a typical fragment of the sun myth that the hero,
when united with the woman attained with difficulty, is exposed in a
cask and thrown into the sea, and then lands for a new life on a distant
shore. The middle part, the “night journey on the sea” in the ark, is
lacking in the tradition of Ogyges.[430] But the rule in mythology is
that the typical parts of a myth can be united in all conceivable
variations, which adds greatly to the extraordinary difficulty of the
interpretation of a particular myth without knowledge of all the others.
The meaning of this cycle of myths mentioned here is clear; it is the
longing _to attain rebirth through the return to the mother’s womb, that
is to say, to become as immortal as the sun_. This longing for the
mother is frequently expressed in our holy scriptures.[431] I recall,
particularly the place in the epistle to the Galatians, where it is said
(iv:26):

  (26) “But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us
  all.

  (27) “For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren that beareth not: break
  forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many
  more children than she which hath an husband.

  (28) “Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.

  (29) “But as he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was
  born after the spirit, even so it is now.

  (30) “Nevertheless, what sayeth the scripture? Cast out the bondwoman
  and her son; for the son of a bondwoman shall not be heir with the son
  of a freewoman.

  (31) “So, then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of
  the free.”

Chapter v:

  (1) “Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
  free.”

The Christians are the children of the City Above, a symbol of the
mother, not sons of the earthly city-mother, who is to be cast out; for
those born after the flesh are opposed to those born after the spirit,
who are not born from the mother in the flesh, but from a symbol for the
mother. One must again think of the Indians at this point, who say the
first people proceeded from the sword-hilt and a shuttle. The religious
thought is bound up with the compulsion to call the mother no longer
mother, but City, Source, Sea, etc. This compulsion can be derived from
the need to manifest an amount of libido bound up with the mother, but
in such a way that the mother is represented by or concealed in a
symbol. The symbolism of the city we find well-developed in the
revelations of John, where two cities play a great part, one of which is
insulted and cursed by him, the other greatly desired. We read in
Revelation (xvii:1):

  (1) “Come hither: I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great
  whore that sitteth on many waters.

  (2) “With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication and
  the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her
  fornication.

  (3) “So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I
  saw a woman sit on a scarlet colored beast, full of the names of
  blasphemy, and having seven heads and ten horns.

  (4) “And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colors, and
  decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden
  cup[432] in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her
  fornication.

  (5) “And upon her forehead was a name written: _Mystery. Babylon the
  great. The Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth._

  (6) “And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of saints, and with
  the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her I wondered with
  a great admiration.”

Here follows an interpretation of the vision unintelligible to us, from
which we can only emphasize the point that the seven heads[433] of the
dragon means the seven hills upon which the woman sits. This is probably
a distinct allusion to Rome, the city whose temporal power oppressed the
world at the time of the Revelation. The waters upon which the woman
“the mother” sits are “peoples and throngs and nations and tongues.”
This also seems to refer to Rome, for she is the mother of peoples and
possessed all lands. Just as in common speech, for example, colonies are
called daughters, so the people subject to Rome are like members of a
family subject to the mother. In another version of the picture, the
kings of the people, namely, the fathers, commit fornication with this
mother. Revelation continues (xviii: 2):

  (2) “And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the
  Great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils,
  and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
  hateful bird.

  (3) “For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
  fornication.”

Thus this mother does not only become the mother of all abominations,
but also in truth the receptacle of all that is wicked and unclean. The
birds are images of souls;[434] therefore, this means all souls of the
condemned and evil spirits. Thus the mother becomes Hecate, the
underworld, the City of the damned itself. We recognize easily in the
ancient idea of the woman on the dragon,[435] the above-mentioned
representation of Echnida, the mother of the infernal horrors. Babylon
is the idea of the “terrible” mother, who seduces all people to whoredom
with devilish temptation, and makes them drunk with her wine. The
intoxicating drink stands in the closest relation to fornication, for it
is also a libido symbol, as we have already seen in the parallel of fire
and sun. After the fall and curse of Babylon, we find in Revelation
(xix:6–7) the hymn which leads from the under half to the upper half of
the mother, where now everything is possible which would be impossible
without the repression of incest:

  (6) “Alleluia, the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.

  (7) “Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the
  marriage of the Lamb is come,[436] and his wife hath made herself
  ready.

  (8) “And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
  clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.

  (9) “And he saith unto me, ‘Write, Blessed are they which are called
  unto the marriage supper of the Lamb.’”

The Lamb is the son of man who celebrates his marriage with the “woman.”
Who the “woman” is remains obscure at first. But Revelation (xxi:9)
shows us which “woman” is the bride, the Lamb’s wife:

  (9) “Come hither, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife.[437]

  (10) “And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high
  mountain, and showed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem,
  descending out of heaven from God, having the glory of God.”

It is evident from this quotation, after all that goes before, that the
City, the heavenly bride, who is here promised to the Son, is the
mother.[438] In Babylon the impure maid was cast out, according to the
Epistle to the Galatians, so that here in heavenly Jerusalem the
mother-bride may be attained the more surely. It bears witness to the
most delicate psychologic perception that the fathers of the church who
formulated the canons preserved this bit of the symbolic significance of
the Christ mystery. It is a treasure house for the phantasies and myth
materials which underlie primitive Christianity.[439] The further
attributes which were heaped upon the heavenly Jerusalem make its
significance as mother overwhelmingly clear:

  (1) “And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal,
  proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.

  (2) “In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the
  river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits,
  and yielded her fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree were for
  the healing of nations.

  (3) “And there shall be no more curse.”

In this quotation we come upon the symbol of the waters, which we found
in the mention of Ogyges in connection with the city. The maternal
significance of water belongs to the clearest symbolism in the realm of
mythology,[440] so that the ancients could say: ἠ θάλασσα—τῆς γενέσεως
σύμβολον.[441] From water comes life;[442] therefore, of the two gods
which here interest us the most, Christ and Mithra, the latter was born
beside a river, according to representations, while Christ experienced
his new birth in the Jordan; moreover, he is born from the Πηγή,[443]
the “sempiterni fons amoris,” the mother of God, who by the
heathen-Christian legend was made a nymph of the Spring. The “Spring” is
also found in Mithracism. A Pannonian dedication reads, “Fonti perenni.”
An inscription in Apulia is dedicated to the “Fons Aeterni.” In Persia,
Ardvîçûra is the well of the water of life. Ardvîçûra-Anahita is a
goddess of water and love (just as Aphrodite is born from foam). The
neo-Persians designate the Planet Venus and a nubile girl by the name
“Nahid.” In the temples of Anaitis there existed prostitute Hierodules
(harlots). In the Sakaeen (in honor of Anaitis) there, occurred ritual
combats as in the festival of the Egyptian Ares and his mother. In the
Vedas the waters are called Mâtritamâh—the most maternal.[443] All that
is living rises as does the sun, from the water, and at evening plunges
into the water. Born from the springs, the rivers, the seas, at death
man arrives at the waters of the Styx in order to enter upon the “night
journey on the sea.” The wish is that the black water of death might be
the water of life; that death, with its cold embrace, might be the
mother’s womb, just as the sea devours the sun, but brings it forth
again out of the maternal womb (Jonah motive[444]). Life believes not in
death.

            “In the flood of life, in the torrent of deeds,
            I toss up and down,
            I am blown to and fro!
            Cradle and grave,
            An eternal sea;
            A changing web,
            A glowing life.”          —_Goethe: Faust._

That ξύλον ζωῆς, the wood of life, or the tree of life, is a maternal
symbol would seem to follow from the previous deductions. The etymologic
connection of ὕο, ὕλε, υἱός, in the Indo-Germanic root suggests the
blending of the meanings in the underlying symbolism of mother and of
generation. The tree of life is probably, first of all, a fruit-bearing
genealogical tree, that is, a mother-image. Countless myths prove the
derivation of man from trees; many myths show how the hero is enclosed
in the maternal tree—thus dead Osiris in the column, Adonis in the
myrtle, etc. Numerous female divinities were worshipped as trees, from
which resulted the cult of the holy groves and trees. It is of
transparent significance when Attis castrates himself under a pine tree,
i. e. he does it because of the mother. Goddesses were often worshipped
in the form of a tree or of a wood. Thus Juno of Thespiæ was a branch of
a tree, Juno of Samos was a board. Juno of Argos was a column. The
Carian Diana was an uncut piece of wood. Athene of Lindus was a polished
column. Tertullian calls Ceres of Pharos “rudis palus et informe lignum
sine effigie.” Athenaeus remarks of Latona at Dalos that she is ξὐλινον
ἄμορφον, a shapeless piece of wood.[445] Tertullian calls an Attic
Pallas “crucis stipes,” a wooden pale or mast. The wooden pale is
phallic, as the name suggests, φάλης, Pallus. The φαλλός is a pale, a
ceremonial lingam carved out of figwood, as are all Roman statues of
Priapus. Φάλος means a projection or centrepiece on the helmet, later
called κῶνος just as ἀναφαλ-αντίασις signifies baldheadedness on the
forepart of the head, and φαλακρός signifies baldheadedness in regard to
the φάλος-κῶνος of the helmet; a semi-phallic meaning is given to the
upper part of the head as well.[446] Φάλληνος has, besides φαλλός, the
significance of “wooden”; φαλ-άγγωμα, “cylinder”; φάλαγξ, “a round
beam.” The Macedonian battle array, distinguished by its powerful
impetus, is called φάλαγξ; moreover, the finger-joint[447] is called
φάλαγξ. φάλλαινα or φάλαινα is a whale. Now φαλός appears with the
meaning “shining, brilliant.” The Indo-Germanic root is _bhale_ = to
bulge, to swell.[448] Who does not think of Faust?

              “It grows, it shines, increases in my hand!”

That is primitive libido symbolism, which shows how immediate is the
connection between phallic libido and light. The same relations are
found in the Rigveda in Rudra’s utterances.

  _Rigveda_ 1, 114, 3:

  “May we obtain your favor, thou man ruling, Oh urinating Rudra.”

I refer here to the previously mentioned phallic symbolism of Rudra in
the Upanishads:

  (4) “We call for help below to the flaming Rudra, to the one bringing
  the sacrifice; him who encircles and wanders (wandering in the vault
  of Heaven) to the seer.”

  2, 33, 5:

  “He who opens up the sweet, who listens to our calls, the ruddy one,
  with the beautiful helmet, may he not give us over to the powers of
  jealousy.

  (6) “I have been rejoiced by the bull connected with Marut, the
  supplicating one with strong force of life.

  (8) “Sound the powerful song of praise to the ruddy bull to the white
  shining one; worship the flaming one with honor, we sing of the
  shining being Rudra.

  “May Rudra’s missile (arrow) not be used on us, may the great
  displeasure of the shining one pass us by: Unbend the firm (bow or
  hard arrow?) for the princes, thou who blessest with the waters of thy
  body (generative strength), be gracious to our children and
  grandchildren.”[449]

In this way we pass from the realm of mother symbolism imperceptibly
into the realm of male phallic symbolism. This element also lies in the
tree, even in the family tree, as is distinctly shown by the mediæval
family trees. From the first ancestor there grows upward, in the place
of the “membrum virile,” the trunk of the great tree. The bisexual
symbolic character of the tree is intimated by the fact that in Latin
trees have a masculine termination and a feminine gender.[450] The
feminine (especially the maternal) meaning of the forest and the phallic
significance of trees in dreams is well known. I mention an example.

It concerns a woman who had always been nervous, and who, after many
years of marriage, became ill as a result of the typical retention of
the libido. She had the following dream after she had learned to know a
young man of many engaging free opinions who was very pleasing to her:
She found herself in a garden where stood a remarkable exotic tree with
strange red fleshy flowers or fruits. She picked them and ate them.
Then, to her horror, she felt that she was poisoned. This dream idea may
easily be understood by means of the antique or poetic symbolism, so I
can spare information as to the analytic material.

The double significance of the tree is readily explained by the fact
that such symbols are not to be understood “anatomically” but
psychologically as libido symbols; therefore, it is not permissible to
interpret the tree on account of its similar form as directly phallic;
it can also be called a woman or the uterus of the mother. The
uniformity of the significance lies alone in the similarity to the
libido.[451] One loses one’s way in one “cul de sac” after another by
saying that this is the symbol substituted for the mother and that for
the penis. In this realm there is no fixed significance of things. The
only reality here is the libido, for which “all that is perishable is
merely a symbol.” It is not the physical actual mother, but the libido
of the son, the object of which was once the mother. We take mythologic
symbols much too concretely and wonder at every step about the endless
contradictions. These contradictions arise only because we constantly
forget that in the realm of phantasy “feeling is all.” Whenever we read,
therefore, “his mother was a wicked sorcerer,” the translation is as
follows: The son is in love with her, namely, he is unable to detach his
libido from the mother-imago; he therefore suffers from incestuous
resistance.

The symbolism of water and trees, which are met with as further
attributes in the symbol of the City, also refer to that amount of
libido which unconsciously is fastened to the mother-imago. In certain
parts of Revelation the unconscious psychology of religious longing is
revealed, namely, the longing for the _mother_.[452] The expectation of
Revelation ends in the mother: καὶ πᾶν κατάθεμα οὐκ ἔσται ἔτι (“and
there shall be no more curse”). There shall be no more sins, no
repression, no disharmony with one’s self, no guilt, no fear of death
and no pain of separation more!

Thus Revelation echoes that same radiant mystical harmony which was
caught again 2,000 years later and expressed poetically in the last
prayer of Dr. Marianus:

            “Penitents, look up, elate,
            Where she beams salvation;
            Gratefully to blessed fate
            Grow, in recreation!
            Be our souls, as they have been,
            Dedicate to thee!
            Virgin Holy, Mother, Queen,
            Goddess, gracious be!”        —_Goethe: Faust._

One principal question arises at the sight of this beauty and greatness
of feeling, that is, whether the primary tendency compensated by
religion is not too narrowly understood as incestuous. I have previously
observed in regard to this that I consider the “resistance opposed to
libido” as in a general way coincident with the incest prohibition. I
must leave open for the present the definition of the psychological
incest conception. However, I will here emphasize the point that it is
most especially the totality of the sun myth which proves to us that the
fundamental basis of the “incestuous” desire does not aim at
cohabitation, but at the special thought of becoming a child again, of
turning back to the parent’s protection, of coming into the mother once
more in order to be born again. But incest stands in the path to this
goal, that is to say, the necessity of in some way again gaining
entrance into the mother’s womb. One of the simplest ways would be to
impregnate the mother, and to reproduce one’s self identically. But here
the incest prohibition interferes; therefore, the myths of the sun or of
rebirth teem with all possible proposals as to how incest can be evaded.
A very simple method of avoidance is to transform the mother into
another being or to rejuvenate[453] her after birth has occurred, to
have her disappear again or have her change back. It is not incestuous
cohabitation which is desired, but the rebirth, which now is attained
most readily through cohabitation. But this is not the only way,
although perhaps the original one. The resistance to the incest
prohibition makes the phantasy inventive; for example, it was attempted
to impregnate the mother by means of a magic charm of fertility (to wish
for a child). Attempts in this respect remain in the stage of mythical
phantasies; but they have one result, and that is the exercise of the
phantasy which gradually produces paths through the creation of
phantastic possibilities, in which the libido, taking an active part,
can flow off. Thus the libido becomes _spiritualized in an imperceptible
manner_. The power “which always wishes evil” thus creates a spiritual
life. Therefore, in religions, this course is now raised to a system. On
that account it is exceedingly instructive to see how religion takes
pains to further these symbolic transferences.[454] The New Testament
furnishes us with an excellent example in regard to this. Nicodemus, in
the speech regarding rebirth, cannot forbear understanding the matter
very realistically.

  _John_ iii:4:

  (4) “How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time
  into his mother’s womb, and be born?”

But Jesus endeavors to raise into purity the sensuous view of
Nicodemus’s mind moulded in materialistic heaviness, and announces to
him—really the same—and yet not the same:

  (5) “Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water
  and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

  (6) “That which is born of the flesh is flesh: and that which is born
  of the spirit is spirit.

  (7) “Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.

  (8) “The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound
  thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth; so
  is everyone that is born of the spirit.”

To be born of water means simply to be born from the mother’s womb. To
be born of the spirit means to be born from the fructifying breath of
the wind; this we learn from the Greek text (where spirit and wind are
expressed by the same word, πνεῦμα) τὸ γεγεννημένον ἐκ τῆς σαρκος σάρξ
ἐστιν, καὶ τὸ γεγεννημένον ἐκ τοῦ πνεύματος πνεῦμά ἐστιν.—Τὸ πνεῦμα ὅπου
θέλει πνεῖ,[455] etc.

This symbolism rose from the same need as that which produced the
Egyptian legend of the vultures, the mother symbol. They were only
females and were fertilized by the wind. One recognizes very clearly the
ethical demand as the foundation of these mythologic assertions: _thou
must say of the mother that she was not impregnated by a mortal in the
ordinary way, but by a spiritual being in an unusual manner_. This
demand stands in strict opposition to the real truth; therefore, the
myth is a fitting solution. One can say it was a hero who died and was
born again in a remarkable manner, and in this way attained immortality.
The need which this demand asserts is evidently a prohibition against a
definite phantasy concerning the mother. A son may naturally think that
a father has generated him in a carnal way, but not that he himself
impregnated the mother and so caused himself to be born again into
renewed youth. This incestuous phantasy which for some reason possesses
an extraordinary strength,[456] and, therefore, appears as a compulsory
wish, is repressed and, conforming to the above demand, under certain
conditions, expresses itself again, symbolically, concerning the problem
of birth, or rather concerning individual rebirth from the mother. In
Jesus’s challenge to Nicodemus we clearly recognize this tendency:
“Think not carnally or thou art carnal, but think symbolically, then art
thou spirit.” It is evident how extremely educative and developing this
compulsion toward symbolism can be. Nicodemus would remain fixed in low
commonplaces if he did not succeed in raising himself through symbols
above this repressed incestuous desire. As a righteous philistine of
culture, he probably was not very anxious for this effort, because men
seem really to remain satisfied in repressing the incestuous libido, and
at best to express it by some modest religious exercises. Yet it seems
to be important, on the other side, that man should not merely renounce
and repress and thereby remain firmly fixed in the incestuous bond, but
that he should redeem those dynamic forces which lie bound up in incest,
in order to fulfil himself. For man needs his whole libido, to fill out
the boundaries of his personality, and then, for the first time, he is
in a condition to do his best. The paths by which man may manifest his
incestuously fixed libido seem to have been pointed out by the religious
mythologic symbols. On this account Jesus teaches Nicodemus: “Thou
thinkest of thy incestuous wish for rebirth, but thou must think that
thou art born from the water and that thou art generated by the breath
of the wind,[457] and in this way thou shalt share in eternal life.”

Thus the libido which lies inactive in the incestuous bond repressed and
in fear of the law and the avenging Father God can be led over into
sublimation through the symbol of baptism (birth from water) and of
generation (spiritual birth) through the symbol of the descent of the
Holy Ghost. Thus man becomes a child[458] again and is born into a
circle of brothers and sisters; but his mother is the “communion of the
saints,” the church, and his circle of brothers and sisters is humanity,
with whom he is united anew in the common inheritance of the primitive
symbol.

It seems that at the time in which Christianity had its origin this
process was especially necessary; for that period, as the result of the
incredible contrast between slavery and the freedom of the citizens and
masters, had entirely lost the consciousness of the common bond of
mankind. One of the next and most essential reasons for the energetic
regression to the infantile in Christianity, which goes hand in hand
with the revival of the incest problem, was probably to be found in the
far-reaching depreciation of women. At that time sexuality was so easily
attainable that the result could only be a very excessive depreciation
of the sexual object. The existence of personal values was first
discovered by Christianity, and there are many people who have not
discovered it even in the present day. However, the depreciation of the
sexual object hinders the outflow of that libido which cannot be
satisfied by sexual activity, because it belongs to an already
desexualized higher order. (If it were not so, a Don Juan could never be
neurotic; but the contrary is the case.) For how might those higher
valuations be given to a worthless, despised object? Therefore, the
libido, after having seen a “Helen in every woman” for so long a time,
sets out on a search for the difficult to obtain, the worshipped, but
perhaps unattainable, goal, and which in the unconscious is the mother.
Therefore the symbolic needs, based on the incest resistance, arise
again in an increased degree, which promptly transforms the beautiful,
sinful world of the Olympian Gods into incomprehensible, dreamlike, dark
mysteries, which, with their accessions of symbols and obscure
meaningful texts, remove us very far from the religious feelings of that
Roman-Græco world. When we see how much trouble Jesus took to make
acceptable to Nicodemus the symbolic perception of things, that is to
say, really a repression and veiling over of the actual facts, and how
important it was for the history of civilization in general, that people
thought and still think in this way, then we understand the revolt which
is raised everywhere against the psychologic discovery of the true
background of the neurotic or normal symbolism. Always and everywhere we
encounter the odious realm of sexuality, which represents to all
righteous people of to-day something defiled. However, less than 2,000
years have passed since the religious cult of sexuality was more or less
openly in full bloom. To be sure, they were heathen and did not know
better, but the nature of religious power does not change from cycle to
cycle. If one has once received an effectual impression of the sexual
contents of the ancient cults, and if one realizes oneself that the
religious experience, that is, the union[459] with the God of antiquity,
was understood by antiquity as a more or less concrete coitus, then
truly one can no longer fancy that the motor forces of a religion have
suddenly become wholly different since the birth of Christ. Exactly the
same thing has occurred as with the hysteric who at first indulges in
some quite unbeautiful, infantile sexual manifestations and afterwards
develops a hyperæsthetic negation in order to convince every one of his
special purity. _Christianity, with its repression of the manifest
sexual, is the negative of the ancient sexual cult._ The original cult
has changed its tokens.[460] One only needs to realize how much of the
gay paganism, even to the inclusion of unseemly Gods, has been taken
into the Christian church. Thus the old indecent Priapus celebrated a
gay festival of resurrection in St. Tychon.[461] Also partly in the
physicians Sts. Kosma and Damien, who graciously condescended to accept
the “membra virilia” in wax at their festival.[462] St. Phallus of old
memories emerges again to be worshipped in country chapels, to say
nothing of the rest of the paganism!

There are those who have not yet learned to recognize sexuality as a
function equivalent to hunger and who, therefore, consider it as
disgraceful that certain taboo institutions which were considered as
asexual refuges are now recognized as overflowing with sexual symbolism.
Those people are doomed to the painful realization that such is still
the case, in spite of their great revolt. One must learn to understand
that, opposed to the customary habit of thought, psychoanalytic thinking
reduces and resolves those symbolic structures which have become more
and more complicated through countless elaboration. This means a course
of reduction which would be an intellectual enjoyment if the object were
different. But here it becomes distressing, not only æsthetically, but
apparently also ethically, because the repressions which are to be
overcome have been brought about by our best intentions. We must
commence to overcome our virtuousness with the certain fear of falling
into baseness on the other side. This is certainly true, for
virtuousness is always inwardly compensated by a great tendency towards
baseness; and how many profligates are there who inwardly preserve a
mawkish virtue and moral megalomania? Both categories of men turn out to
be snobs when they come in contact with analytic psychology, because the
moral man has imagined an objective and cheap verdict on sexuality and
the unmoral man is entirely unaware of the vulgarity of his sexuality
and of his incapacity for an unselfish love. One completely forgets that
one can most miserably be carried away, not only by a vice, but also by
a virtue. There is a fanatic orgiastic self-righteousness which is just
as base and which entails just as much injustice and violence as a vice.

At this time, when a large part of mankind is beginning to discard
Christianity, it is worth while to understand clearly why it was
originally accepted. It was accepted in order to escape at last from the
brutality of antiquity. As soon as we discard it, licentiousness
returns, as impressively exemplified by life in our large modern cities.
This step is not a forward step, but a backward one. It is as with
individuals who have laid aside one form of transference and have no new
one. Without fail they will occupy regressively the old path of
transference, to their great detriment, because the world around them
has since then essentially changed. He who is repelled by the historical
and philosophical weakness of the Christian dogmatism and the religious
emptiness of an historical Jesus, of whose person we know nothing and
whose religious value is partly Talmudic, partly Hellenic wisdom, and
discards Christianity, and therewith Christian morality, is certainly
confronted with the ancient problem of licentiousness. To-day the
individual still feels himself restrained by the public hypocritical
opinion, and, therefore, prefers to lead a secret, separate life, but
publicly to represent morality. It might be different if men in general
all at once found the moral mask too dull, and if they realized how
dangerously their beasts lie in wait for each other, and then truly a
frenzy of demoralization might sweep over humanity. This is the dream,
the wish dream, of the morally limited man of to-day; he forgets
necessity, which strangles men and robs them of their breath, and which
with a stern hand interrupts every passion.

It must not be imputed to me that I am wishing to refer the libido back
by analytical reduction to the primitive, almost conquered, stages,
entirely forgetting the fearful misery this would entail for humanity.
Indeed, some individuals would let themselves be transported by the
old-time frenzy of sexuality, from which the burden of guilt has been
removed, to their own greatest detriment.

But these are the ones who under other circumstances would have
prematurely perished in some other way. However, I well know the most
effectual and most inexorable regulator of human sexuality. This is
necessity. With this leaden weight human lust will never fly too high.

To-day there are countless neurotics who are so simply because they do
not know how to seek happiness in their own manner. They do not even
realize where the lack lies. And besides these neurotics there are many
more normal people—and precisely people of the higher type—who feel
restricted and discontented. For all these reduction to the sexual
elements should be undertaken, in order that they may be reinstated into
the possession of their primitive self, and thereby learn to know and
value its relation to the entire personality. In this way alone can
certain requirements be fulfilled and others be repudiated as unfit
because of their infantile character. In this way the individual will
come to realize that certain things are to be sacrificed, although they
are accomplished, _but in another sphere_. We imagine that we have long
renounced, sacrificed and cut off our incest wish, and that nothing of
it is left. But it does not occur to us that this is not true, but that
we unconsciously commit incest in another territory. In religious
symbols, for example, we come across incest.[463] We consider the
incestuous wish vanished and lost, and then rediscover it in full force
in religion. This process or transformation has taken place
unconsciously in secular development. Just as in Part I it is shown that
a similar unconscious transformation of the libido is an ethically
worthless pose, and with which I compared the Christianity of early
Roman antiquity, where evidently licentiousness and brutality were
strongly resisted, so here I must remark in regard to the sublimation of
the incestuous libido, that the belief in the religious symbol has
ceased to be an ethical ideal; but it is an unconscious transformation
of the incest wish into symbolic acts and symbolic concepts which cheat
men, as it were, so that heaven appears to them as a father and earth as
a mother and the people upon it children and brothers and sisters. Thus
man can remain a child for all time and satisfy his incest wish all
unawares. This state would doubtless be ideal[464] if it were not
infantile and, therefore, merely a one-sided wish, which maintains a
childish attitude. _The reverse is anxiety._ Much is said of pious
people who remain unshaken in their trust in God and wander unswervingly
safe and blessed through the world. I have never seen this Chidher yet.
It is probably a wish figure. The rule is great uncertainty among
believers, which they drown with fanatical cries among themselves or
among others; moreover, they have religious doubts, moral uncertainty,
doubts of their own personality, feelings of guilt and, deepest of all,
great fear of the opposite aspect of reality, against which the most
highly intelligent people struggle with all their force. This other side
is the devil, the adversary or, expressed in modern terms, the
corrective of reality, of the infantile world picture, which has been
made acceptable through the predominating pleasure principle.[465] But
the world is not a garden of God, of the Father, but a place of terrors.
Not only is heaven no father and earth no mother and the people not
brothers nor sisters, but they represent hostile, destroying powers, to
which we are abandoned the more surely, the more childishly and
thoughtlessly we have entrusted ourselves to the so-called Fatherly hand
of God. One should never forget the harsh speech of the first Napoleon,
that the good God is always on the side of the heaviest artillery.

The religious myth meets us here as one of the greatest and most
significant human institutions which, despite misleading symbols,
nevertheless gives man assurance and strength, so that he may not be
overwhelmed by the monsters of the universe. The symbol, considered from
the standpoint of actual truth, is misleading, indeed, but it is
_psychologically true_,[466] because it was and is the bridge to all the
greatest achievements of humanity.

But this does not mean to say that this unconscious way of
transformation of the incest wish into religious exercises is the only
one or the only possible one. There is also a conscious recognition and
understanding with which we can take possession of this libido which is
bound up in incest and transformed into religious exercises so that we
no longer need the stage of religious symbolism for this end. It is
thinkable that instead of doing good to our fellow-men, for “the love of
Christ,” we do it from the knowledge that humanity, even as ourselves,
could not exist if, among the herd, the one could not sacrifice himself
for the other. _This would be the course of moral autonomy, of perfect
freedom, when man could without compulsion wish that which he must do,
and this from knowledge, without delusion through belief in the
religious symbols._

It is a positive creed which keeps us infantile and, therefore,
ethically inferior. Although of the greatest significance from the
cultural point of view and of imperishable beauty from the æsthetic
standpoint, this delusion can no longer ethically suffice humanity
striving after moral autonomy.

The infantile and moral danger lies in belief in the symbol because
through that we guide the libido to an imaginary reality. The simple
negation of the symbol changes nothing, for the entire mental
disposition remains the same; we merely remove the dangerous object. But
the object is not dangerous; the danger is our own infantile mental
state, for love of which we have lost something very beautiful and
ingenious through the simple abandonment of the religious symbol. I
think _belief should be replaced by understanding_; then we would keep
the beauty of the symbol, but still remain free from the depressing
results of submission to belief. This would be the psychoanalytic cure
for belief and disbelief.


The vision following upon that of the city is that of a “strange fir
tree with gnarled branches.” This vision does not seem extraordinary to
us after all that we have learned of the tree of life and its
associations with the city and the waters of life. This especial tree
seems simply to continue the category of the mother symbols. The
attribute “strange” probably signifies, as in dreams, a special
emphasis, that is, a special underlying complex material. Unfortunately,
the author gives us no individual material for this. As the tree already
suggested in the symbolism of the city is particularly emphasized
through the further development of Miss Miller’s visions here, I find it
necessary to discuss at some length the history of the symbolism of the
tree.

It is well known that trees have played a large part in the cult myth
from the remotest times. The typical myth tree is the tree of paradise
or of life which we discover abundantly used in Babylonian and also in
Jewish lore; and in prechristian times, the pine tree of Attis, the tree
or trees of Mithra; in Germanic mythology, Ygdrasil and so on. The
hanging of the Attis image on the pine tree; the hanging of Marsyas,
which became a celebrated artistic motive; the hanging of Odin; the
Germanic hanging sacrifices—indeed, the whole series of hanged
gods—teaches us that the hanging of Christ on the cross is not a unique
occurrence in religious mythology, but belongs to the same circle of
ideas as others. In this world of imagery the cross of Christ is the
tree of life, and equally the wood of death. This contrast is not
astounding. Just as the origin of man from trees was a legendary idea,
so there were also burial customs, in which people were buried in hollow
trees. From that the German language retains even now the expression
“Totenbaum” (tree of death) for a coffin. Keeping in mind the fact that
the tree is predominantly a mother symbol, then the mystic significance
of this manner of burial can be in no way incomprehensible to us. _The
dead are delivered back to the mother for rebirth._ We encounter this
symbol in the Osiris myth, handed down by Plutarch,[467] which is, in
general, typical in various aspects. Rhea is pregnant with Osiris; at
the same time also with Isis; Osiris and Isis mate even in the mother’s
womb (motive of the night journey on the sea with incest). Their son is
Arueris, later called Horus. It is said of Isis that she was born “in
absolute humidity” (τετάρτῃ δὲ τῆν Ἴσιν ἐν πανύγροις γενέσθαι[468]). It
is said of Osiris that a certain Pamyles in Thebes heard a voice from
the temple of Zeus while drawing water, which commanded him to proclaim
that Osiris was born μέγας βασιλεὺς εὐεργέτης Ὄσιρις.[469] In honor of
this the Pamylion were celebrated. They were similar to the
phallophorion. Pamyles is a phallic demon, similar to the original
Dionysus. The myth reduced reads: Osiris and Isis were generated by
phallus from the water (mother womb) in the ordinary manner. (Kronos had
made Rhea pregnant, the relation was secret, and Rhea was his sister.
Helios, however, observed it and cursed the relation.) Osiris was killed
in a crafty manner by the god of the underworld, Typhon, who locked him
in a chest. He was thrown into the Nile, and so carried out to sea.
Osiris, however, mated in the underworld with his second sister,
Nephthys (motive of the night journey to the sea with incest). One sees
here how the symbolism is developed. In the mother womb, before the
outward existence, Osiris commits incest; in death, the second
intrauterine existence, Osiris again commits incest. Both times with a
sister who is simply substituted for the mother as a legal, uncensured
symbol, since the marriage with a sister in early antiquity was not
merely tolerated, but was really commended. Zarathustra also recommended
the marriage of kindred. This form of myth would be impossible to-day,
because cohabitation with the sister, being incestuous, would be
repressed. The wicked Typhon entices Osiris craftily into a box or
chest; this distortion of the true state of affairs is transparent. The
“original sin” caused men to wish to go back into the mother again, that
is, the incestuous desire for the mother, condemned by law, is the ruse
supposedly invented by Typhon. The fact is, the ruse is very
significant. Man tries to sneak into rebirth through subterfuge in order
to become a child again. An early Egyptian hymn[470] even raises an
accusation against the mother Isis because she destroys the sun-god Rê
by treachery. It was interpreted as the ill-will of the mother towards
her son that she banished and betrayed him. The hymn describes how Isis
fashioned a snake, put it in the path of Rê, and how the snake wounded
the sun-god with a poisonous bite, from which wound he never recovered,
so that finally he had to retire on the back of the heavenly cow. But
this cow is the cow-headed goddess, just as Osiris is the bull Apis. The
mother is accused as if she were the cause of man flying to the mother
in order to be cured of the wound which she had herself inflicted. This
wound is the prohibition of incest.[471] Man is thus cut off from the
hopeful certainty of childhood and early youth, from all the
unconscious, instinctive happenings which permit the child to live as an
appendage of his parents, unconscious of himself. There must be
contained in this many sensitive memories of the animal age, where there
was not any “thou shalt” and “thou shalt not,” but all was just simple
occurrence. Even yet a deep animosity seems to live in man because a
brutal law has separated him from the instinctive yielding to his
desires and from the great beauty of the harmony of the animal nature.
This separation manifested itself, among other things, in the incest
prohibition and its correlates (laws of marriage, etc.); therefore pain
and anger relate to the mother, as if she were responsible for the
domestication of the sons of men. In order not to become conscious of
his incest wish (his backward harking to the animal nature), the son
throws all the burden of the guilt on the mother, from which arises the
idea of the “terrible mother.”[472] The mother becomes for him a spectre
of anxiety, a nightmare.[473]

After the completed “night journey to the sea,” the chest of Osiris was
cast ashore by Byblos, and lay in the branches of an Erica, which grew
around the coffin and became a splendid tree. The king of the land had
the tree placed as a column under his roof.[474] During this period of
Osiris’s absence (the winter solstice) the lament customary during
thousands of years for the dead god and his return occurs, and its
εὕρεσις is a feast of joy. A passage from the mournful quest of Isis is
especially noteworthy:

  “She flutters like a swallow lamenting around the column, which
  encloses the god sleeping in death.”

(This same motive returns in the Kyffhäuser saga.)

[Illustration: FRUCTIFICATION FOLLOWING UPON THE MITHRAIC SACRIFICE]

Later on Typhon dismembers the corpse and scatters the pieces. We come
upon the _motive of dismemberment_ in countless sun myths,[475] namely,
the inversion of the idea of the composition of the child in the
mother’s womb.[476] In fact, the mother Isis collects the pieces of the
body with the help of the jackal-headed Anubis. (She finds the corpse
with the help of dogs.) Here the nocturnal devourers of bodies, the dogs
and jackals, become the assistants of the composition, of the
reproduction.[477] The Egyptian vulture owes its symbolic meaning as
mother to this necrophagic habit. In Persian antiquity the corpses were
thrown out for the dogs to devour, just as to-day in the Indian funeral
pyres the removal of the carcasses is left to the vultures. Persia was
familiar with the custom of leading a dog to the bed of one dying,
whereupon the latter had to present the dog with a morsel.[478] The
custom, on its surface, evidently signifies that the morsel is to belong
to the dog, so that he will spare the body of the dead, precisely as
Cerberus was soothed by the honey-cakes which Hercules gave to him in
the journey to hell. But when we bear in mind the jackal-headed Anubis
who rendered his good services in the gathering together of the
dismembered Osiris, and the mother significance of the vulture, then the
question arises whether something deeper was not meant by this ceremony.
Creuzer has also concerned himself with this idea, and has come to the
conclusion that the astral form of the dog ceremony, that is, the
appearance of Sirius, the dog star, at the period of the sun’s highest
position, is related to this in that the introduction of the dog has a
compensatory significance, death being thereby made, reversedly, equal
to the sun’s highest position. This is quite in conformity with
psychologic thought, which results from the very general fact that death
is interpreted as entrance into the mother’s womb (rebirth). This
interpretation would seem to be supported by the otherwise enigmatic
function of the dog in the Sacrificium Mithriacum. In the monuments a
dog always leaps up upon the bull killed by Mithra. However, this
sacrifice is probably to be interpreted through the Persian legend, as
well as through the monument, as the moment of the _highest fecundity_.
The most beautiful expression of this is seen upon the magnificent
Mithra relief of Heddernheim. Upon one side of a large stone slab
(formerly probably rotating) is seen the stereotyped overthrowing and
sacrifice of the bull, but upon the other side stands Sol, with a bunch
of grapes in his hand, Mithra with the cornucopia, the Dadophores with
fruits, corresponding to the legend that all fecundity proceeds from the
dead bull of the world, fruits from the horns, wine from its blood,
grain from the tail, cattle from its sperma, leek from its nose, and so
on. Silvanus stands above this scene with the animals of the forest
arising from him. The significance suspected by Creuzer might very
easily belong to the dog in this connection.[479] Let us now turn back
to the myth of Osiris. In spite of the restoration of the corpse
accomplished by Isis, the resuscitation succeeds only incompletely in so
far as the phallus of Osiris cannot again be produced, because it was
eaten by the fishes; the power of life was wanting.[480] Osiris as a
phantom once more impregnated Isis, but the fruit is Harpocrates, who
was feeble in τοῖς κάτωθεν γυίοις (in the lower limbs), that is,
corresponding to the significance of γυῖον (at the feet). (Here, as is
plainly evident, foot is used in the phallic meaning.) This incurability
of the setting sun corresponds to the incurability of Rê in the
above-mentioned older Egyptian sun hymn. Osiris, although only a
phantom, now prepares the young sun, his son Horus, for a battle with
Typhon, the evil spirit of darkness. Osiris and Horus correspond to the
father-son symbolism mentioned in the beginning, which symbolic figure,
corresponding again to the above formulation,[481] is flanked by the
well-formed and ugly figures of Horus and Harpocrates, the latter
appearing mostly as a cripple, often represented distorted to a mere
caricature.[482]

He is confused in the tradition very much with Horus, with whom he also
has the name in common. Hor-pi-chrud, as his real name[483] reads, is
composed from _chrud_, “child,” and _Hor_, from the adjective _hri_ =
up, on top, and signifies the up-coming child, as the rising sun, and
opposed to Osiris, who personifies the setting sun—the sun of the west.
Thus Osiris and Horpichrud or Horus are one being, both husband and son
of the same mother, Hathor-Isis. The Chnum-Ra, the sun god of lower
Egypt, represented as a ram, has at his side, as the female divinity of
the land, Hatmehit, who wears the fish on her head. She is the mother
and wife of Bi-neb-did (Ram, local name of Chnum-Ra). In the hymn of
Hibis,[484] Amon-ra was invoked:

  “Thy (Chum-Ram) dwells in Mendes, united as the quadruple god Thmuis.
  He is the phallus, the lord of the gods. The bull of his mother
  rejoices in the cow (ahet, the mother) and man fructifies through his
  semen.”

In further inscriptions Hatmehit was directly referred to as the “mother
of Mendes.” (Mendes is the Greek form of Bi-neb-did: ram.) She is also
invoked as the “Good,” with the additional significance of _ta-nofert_,
or “young woman.” The cow as symbol of the mother is found in all
possible forms and variations of Hathor-Isis, and also in the female Nun
(parallel to this is the primitive goddess Nit or Neith), the protoplasm
which, related to the Hindoo Atman,[485] is equally of masculine and
feminine nature. Nun is, therefore, invoked as Amon,[486] the original
water,[487] which is in the beginning. He is also designated as the
father of fathers, the mother of mothers. To this corresponds the
invocation to the female side of Nun-Amon, of Nit or Neith.

  “Nit, the ancient, the mother of god, the mistress of Esne, the father
  of fathers, the mother of mothers, who is the beetle and the vulture,
  the being in its beginning.

  “Nit, the ancient, the mother who bore the light god, Râ, who bore
  first of all, when there was nothing which brought forth.

  “The cow, the ancient, which bore the sun, and then laid the germ of
  gods and men.”

The word “nun” has the significance of young, fresh, new, also the
on-coming waters of the Nile flood. In a transferred sense “nun” was
also used for the chaotic primitive waters; in general for the primitive
generating matter[488] which was personified by the goddess Nunet. From
her Nut sprang, the goddess of heaven, who was represented with a starry
body, and also as the heavenly cow with a starry body.

When the sun-god, little by little, retires on the back of the heavenly
cow, just as poor Lazarus returns into Abraham’s bosom, each has the
same significance; they return into the mother, in order to rise as
Horus. Thus it can be said that in the morning the goddess is the
mother, at noon the sister-wife and in the evening again the mother, who
receives the dying in her lap, reminding us of the Pietà of
Michelangelo. As shown by the illustration (from Dideron’s “Iconographie
Chrétienne”), this thought has been transferred as a whole into
Christianity.

Thus the fate of Osiris is explained: he passes into the mother’s womb,
the chest, the sea, the tree, the column of Astartes; he is dismembered,
re-formed, and reappears again in his son, Hor-pi-chrud.

Before entering upon the further mysteries which the beautiful myth
reveals to us, there is still much to be said about the symbol of the
tree. Osiris lies in the branches of the tree, surrounded by them, as in
the mother’s womb. The motive of _embracing and entwining_ is often
found in the sun myths, meaning that it is the _myth of rebirth_. A good
example is the Sleeping Beauty, also the legend of the girl who is
enclosed between the bark and the trunk, but who is freed by a youth
with his horn.[489] The horn is of gold and silver, which hints at the
sunbeam in the phallic meaning. (Compare the previous legend of the
horn.) An exotic legend tells of the sun-hero, how he must be freed from
the plant entwining around him.[490] A girl dreams of her lover who has
fallen into the water; she tries to save him, but first has to pull
seaweed and sea-grass from the water; then she catches him. In an
African myth the hero, after his act, must first be disentangled from
the seaweed. In a Polynesian myth the hero’s ship was encoiled by the
tentacles of a gigantic polyp. Rê’s ship is encoiled by a night serpent
on its night journey on the sea. In the poetic rendering of the history
of Buddha’s birth by Sir Edwin Arnold (“The Light of Asia,” p. 5) the
motive of an embrace is also found:

         “Queen Maya stood at noon, her days fulfilled,
         Under a Palso in the palace grounds,
         A stately trunk, straight as a temple shaft,
         With crown of glossy leaves and fragrant blooms;
         And knowing the time come—for all things knew—
         The conscious tree bent down its boughs to make
         A bower about Queen Maya’s majesty:
         And earth put forth a thousand sudden flowers
         To spread a couch: while ready for the bath
         The rock hard by gave out a limpid stream
         Of crystal flow. So brought she forth the child.”[491]

We come across a very similar motive in the cult legend of the Samian
Hera. Yearly it was claimed that the image disappeared from the temple,
was fastened somewhere on the seashore on a trunk of a Lygos tree and
wound about with its branches. There it was “found,” and was treated
with wedding-cake. This feast is undoubtedly a ἱερὸς γάμος (ritual
marriage), because in Samos there was a legend that Zeus had first had a
long-continued secret love relation with Hera. In Plataea and Argos, the
marriage procession was represented with bridesmaids, marriage feast,
and so on. The festival took place in the wedding month “Γαμηλιών”
(beginning of February). But in Plataea the image was previously carried
into a lonely place in the wood; approximately corresponding to the
legend of Plutarch that Zeus had kidnapped Hera and then had hidden her
in a cave of Cithaeron. According to our deductions, previously made, we
must conclude from this that there is still another train of thought,
namely, the magic charm of a rejuvenation, which is condensed in the
Hierosgamos. The disappearance and hiding in the wood, in the cave, on
the seashore, entwined in a willow tree, points to the death of the sun
and rebirth. The early springtime Γαμηλιών (the time of Marriage) in
February fits in with that very well. In fact, Pausanias informs us that
the Argivian Hera _became a maiden again by a yearly bath in the spring
of Canathos_. The significance of the bath is emphasized by the
information that in the Plataeian cult of Hera Teleia, Tritonian nymphs
appeared as water-carriers. In a tale from the Iliad, where the conjugal
couch of Zeus upon Mount Ida is described, it is said:[492]

         “The son of Saturn spake, and took his wife
         Into his arms, while underneath the pair,
         The sacred Earth threw up her freshest herbs:
         The dewy lotos, and the crocus-flower,
         And thick and soft the hyacinth. All these
         Upbore them from the ground. Upon this couch
         They lay, while o’er them a bright golden cloud
         Gathered and shed its drops of glistening dew.
         So slumbered on the heights of Gargarus
         The All-Father overcome by sleep and love,
         And held his consort in his arms.”
                                       —Trans. by W. C. Bryant.

Drexler recognizes in this description an unmistakable allusion to the
garden of the gods on the extreme western shore of the ocean, an idea
which might have been taken from a Prehomeric Hierosgamos hymn. This
western land is the land of the setting sun, whither Hercules,
Gilgamesh, etc., hasten with the sun, in order to find there
immortality, where the sun and the maternal sea unite in an eternally
rejuvenating intercourse. Our supposition of a condensation of the
Hierosgamos with the myth of rebirth is probably confirmed by this.
Pausanias mentions a related myth fragment where the statue of Artemis
Orthia is also called Lygodesma (chained with willows), because it was
found in a willow tree; this tale seems to be related to the general
Greek celebration of Hierosgamos with the above-mentioned customs.[493]

The motive of the “devouring” which Frobenius has shown to be a regular
constituent of the sun myths is closely related to this (also
metaphorically). The “whale dragon” (mother’s womb) always “devours” the
hero. The devouring may also be partial instead of complete.

A six-year-old girl, who goes to school unwillingly, dreams that her leg
is encircled by a large red worm. She had a tender interest for this
creature, contrary to what might be expected. An adult patient, who
cannot separate from an older friend on account of an extraordinarily
strong mother transference, dreams that “she had to get across some deep
water (typical idea!) with this friend; her friend fell in (mother
transference); she tries to drag her out, and almost succeeds, but a
large crab seizes on the dreamer by the foot and tries to pull her in.”

Etymology also confirms this conception: There is an Indo-Germanic root
_vélu-_, _vel-_, with the meaning of “encircling, surrounding, turning.”
From this is derived Sanskrit _val_, _valati_ = to cover, to surround,
to encircle, to encoil (symbol of the snake); _vallî_ = creeping plant;
_ulûta_ = boa-constrictor = Latin _volûtus_, Lithuanian _velù_, _velti_
= _wickeln_ (to roll up); Church Slavonian _vlina_ = Old High German,
_wella_ = _Welle_ (wave or billow). To the root _vélu_ also belongs the
root _vlvo_, with the meaning “cover, corium, womb.” (The serpent on
account of its casting its skin is an excellent symbol of rebirth.)
Sanskrit _ulva_, _ulba_ has the same meaning; Latin _volva_, _volvula_,
_vulva_. To _vélu_ also belongs the root _ulvorâ_, with the meaning of
“fruitful field, covering or husk of plants, sheath.” Sanskrit _urvárâ_
= sown field. Zend _urvara_ = plant. (See the personification of the
ploughed furrow.) The same root _vel_ has also the meaning of “wallen”
(to undulate). Sanskrit _ulmuka_ = conflagration. Ϝαλέα, Ϝέλα, Gothic
_vulan_ = _wallen_ (to undulate). Old High German and Middle High German
_walm_ = heat, glow.[494] It is typical that in the state of
“involution” the hair of the sun-hero always falls out from the heat.
Further the root _vel_ is found with the meaning “to sound,[495] and to
will, to wish” (libido!).

The motive of encoiling is mother symbolism.[496] This is verified by
the fact that the trees, for example, bring forth again (like the whale
in the legend of Jonah). They do that very generally, thus in the Greek
legend the Μελίαι νύμφαι[497] of the ash trees are the mothers of the
race of men of the Iron Age. In northern mythology, Askr, the ash tree,
is the primitive father. His wife, Embla, is the “Emsige,” the active
one, and not, as was earlier believed, the aspen. _Askr_ probably means,
in the first place, the phallic spear of the ash tree. (Compare the
Sabine custom of parting the bride’s hair with the lance.) The Bundehesh
symbolizes the first people, Meschia and Meschiane, as the tree Reivas,
one part of which places a branch in a hole of the other part. The
material which, according to the northern myth, was animated by the god
when he created men[498] is designated as _trê_ = wood, tree.[499] I
recall also ὕλη = wood, which in Latin is called _materia_. In the wood
of the “world-ash,” Ygdrasil, a human pair hid themselves at the end of
the world, from whom sprang the race of the renewed world.[500] The Noah
motive is easily recognized in this conception (the night journey on the
sea); at the same time, in the symbol of Ygdrasil, a mother idea is
again apparent. At the moment of the destruction of the world the
“world-ash” becomes the guardian mother, the tree of death and life, one
“ἐγκόλπιον.”[501][502] This function of rebirth of the “world-ash” also
helps to elucidate the representation met with in the Egyptian Book of
the Dead, which is called “the gate of knowledge of the soul of the
East”:

  “I am the pilot in the holy keel, I am the steersman who allows no
  rest in the ship of Râ.[503] I know that tree of emerald green from
  whose midst Râ rises to the height of the clouds.”[504]

Ship and tree of the dead (death ship and death tree) are here closely
connected. The conception is that Râ, born from the tree, ascends
(Osiris in the Erika). The representation of the sun-god Mithra is
probably explained in the same way. He is represented upon the
Heddernheim relief, with half his body arising from the top of a tree.
(In the same way numerous other monuments show Mithra half embodied in
the rock, and illustrate a rock birth, similar to Men.) Frequently there
is a stream near the birthplace of Mithra. This conglomeration of
symbols is also found in the birth of Aschanes, the first Saxon king,
who grew from the Harz rocks, which are in the midst of the wood[505]
near a fountain.[506] Here we find all the mother symbols united—earth,
wood, water, three forms of tangible matter. We can wonder no longer
that in the Middle Ages the tree was poetically addressed with the title
of honor, “mistress.” Likewise it is not astonishing that the Christian
legend transformed the tree of death, the cross, into the tree of life,
so that Christ was often represented on a living and fruit-bearing tree.
This reversion of the cross symbol to the tree of life, which even in
Babylon was an important and authentic religious symbol, is also
considered entirely probable by Zöckler,[507] an authority on the
history of the cross. The pre-Christian meaning of the symbol does not
contradict this interpretation; on the contrary, its meaning is life.
The appearance of the cross in the sun worship (here the cross with
equal arms, and the swastika cross, as representative of the sun’s
rays), as well as in the cult of the goddess of love (Isis with the crux
ansata, the rope, the speculum veneris ♀, etc.), in no way contradicts
the previous historical meaning. The Christian legend has made abundant
use of this symbolism.

[Illustration: CHRIST ON THE TREE OF LIFE]

The student of mediæval history is familiar with the representation of
the cross growing above the grave of Adam. The legend was that Adam was
buried on Golgotha. Seth had planted on his grave a branch of the
“paradise tree,” which became the cross and tree of death of
Christ.[508] We all know that through Adam’s guilt sin and death came
into the world, and Christ through his death has redeemed us from the
guilt. To the question in what had Adam’s guilt consisted it is said
that the unpardonable sin to be expiated by death was that he dared to
pick a fruit from the paradise tree.[509] The results of this are
described in an Oriental legend. One to whom it was permitted to cast
one look into Paradise after the fall saw the tree there and the four
streams. But the tree was withered, and in its branches lay an infant.
(The mother had become pregnant.[510])

This remarkable legend corresponds to the Talmudic tradition that Adam,
before Eve, already possessed a demon wife, by name Lilith, with whom he
_quarrelled for mastership_. But Lilith raised herself into the air
through the magic of the name of God and hid herself in the sea. Adam
forced her back with the help of three angels.[511] Lilith became a
nightmare, a Lamia, who threatened those with child and who kidnapped
the new-born child. The parallel myth is that of the Lamias, the
spectres of the night, who terrified the children. The original legend
is that Lamia enticed Zeus, but the jealous Hera, however, caused Lamia
to bring only dead children into the world. Since that time the raging
Lamia is the persecutor of children, whom she destroys wherever she can.
This motive frequently recurs in fairy tales, where the mother often
appears directly as a murderess or as a _devourer of men_;[512] a German
paradigm is the well-known tale of Hansel and Gretel. Lamia is actually
a large, voracious fish, which establishes the connection with the
whale-dragon myth so beautifully worked out by Frobenius, in which the
sea monster devours the sun-hero for rebirth and where the hero must
employ every stratagem to conquer the monster. Here again we meet with
the idea of the “terrible mother” in the form of the voracious fish, the
mouth of death.[513] In Frobenius there are numerous examples where the
monster has devoured not only men but also animals, plants, an entire
country, all of which are redeemed by the hero to a glorious rebirth.

The Lamias are typical nightmares, the feminine nature of which is
abundantly proven.[514] Their universal peculiarity is that they ride
upon their victims. Their counterparts are the spectral horses which
bear their riders along in a mad gallop. One recognizes very easily in
these symbolic forms the type of anxious dream which, as Riklin
shows,[515] has already become important for the interpretation of fairy
tales through the investigation of Laistner.[516] The typical riding
takes on a special aspect through the results of the analytic
investigation of infantile psychology; the two contributions of Freud
and myself[517] have emphasized, on one side, the anxiety significance
of the horse, on the other side the sexual meaning of the phantasy of
riding. When we take these experiences into consideration, we need no
longer be surprised that the maternal “world-ash” Ygdrasil is called in
German “the frightful horse.” Cannegieter[518] says of nightmares:

  “Abigunt eas nymphas (matres deas, mairas) hodie rustici osse capitis
  equini tectis injecto, cujusmodi ossa per has terras in rusticorum
  villis crebra est animadvertere. Nocte autem ad concubia equitare
  creduntur et equos fatigare ad longinqua itinera.”[519]

The connection of nightmare and horse seems, at first glance, to be
present also etymologically—nightmare and mare. The Indo-Germanic root
for märe is _mark_. Märe is the horse, English mare; Old High German
_marah_ (male horse) and _meriha_ (female horse); Old Norse _merr_
(_mara_ = nightmare); Anglo-Saxon _myre_ (_maira_). The French
“cauchmar” comes from _calcare_ = to tread, to step (of iterative
meaning, therefore, “to tread” or press down). It was also said of the
cock who stepped upon the hen. This movement is also typical for the
nightmare; therefore, it is said of King Vanlandi, “Mara trad han,” the
Mara trod on him in sleep even to death.[520] A synonym for nightmare is
the “troll” or “treter”[521] (treader). This movement (_calcare_) is
proven again by the experience of Freud and myself with children, where
a special infantile sexual significance is attached to stepping or
kicking.

The common Aryan root _mar_ means “to die”; therefore, _mara_ the “dead”
or “death.” From this results _mors_, μόρος = fate (also μοῖρα[522]). As
is well known, the Nornes sitting under the “world-ash” personify fate
like Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos. With the Celts the conception of the
Fates probably passes into that of _matres_ and _matronæ_, which had a
divine significance among the Germans. A well-known passage in Julius
Cæsar (“De Bello Gallico,” i: 50) informs us of this meaning of the
mother:

  “Ut matres familias eorum sortibus et vaticinationibus[523]
  declararent, utrum prœlium committi ex usu esset, nec ne.”[524]

In Slav _mara_ means “witch”; poln. _mora_ = demon, nightmare; _mōr_ or
_mōre_ (Swiss-German) means “sow,” also as an insult. The Bohemian
_mura_ means “nightmare” and “evening moth, Sphinx.” This strange
connection is explained through analysis where it often occurs that
animals with movable shells (Venus shell) or wings are utilized for very
transparent reasons as symbols of the female genitals.[525] The
Sphingina are the twilight moths; they, like the nightmare, come in the
darkness. Finally, it is to be observed that the sacred olive tree of
Athens is called “μορία” (that was derived from μόρος). Halirrhotios
wished to cut down the tree, but killed himself with the axe in the
attempt.

The sound resemblance of _mar_, _mère_ with _meer_ = sea and Latin
_mare_ = sea is remarkable, although etymologically accidental. Might it
refer back to “the great primitive idea of the mother” who, in the first
place, meant to us our individual world and afterwards became the symbol
of all worlds? Goethe said of the mothers: “They are encircled by images
of all creatures.” The Christians, too, could not refrain from reuniting
their mother of God with water. “Ave Maris stella” is the beginning of a
hymn to Mary. Then again it is the horses of Neptune which symbolize the
waves of the sea. It is probably of importance that the infantile word
ma-ma (mother’s breast) is repeated in its initial sound in all possible
languages, and that the mothers of two religious heroes are called Mary
and Maya. That the mother is the horse of the child is to be seen most
plainly in the primitive custom of carrying the child on the back or
letting it ride on the hip. Odin hung on the “world-ash,” the mother,
his “horse of terror.” The Egyptian sun-god sits on the back of his
mother, the heavenly cow.

We have already seen that, according to Egyptian conceptions, Isis, the
mother of god, played an evil trick on the sun-god with the poisonous
snake; also Isis behaved treacherously toward her son Horus in
Plutarch’s tradition. That is, Horus vanquished the evil Typhon, who
murdered Osiris treacherously (terrible mother = Typhon). Isis,
_however, set him free again_. Horus thereupon rebelled, _laid hands on
his mother and tore the regal ornaments from her head_, whereupon Hermes
gave her a cow’s head. Then Horus conquered Typhon a second time.
Typhon, in the Greek legend, is a monstrous dragon. Even without this
confirmation it is evident that the battle of Horus is the typical
battle of the sun-hero with the whale-dragon. Of the latter we know that
it is a symbol of the “dreadful mother,” of the voracious jaws of death,
where men are dismembered and ground up.[526] Whoever vanquishes this
monster has gained a new or eternal youth. For this purpose one must, in
spite of all dangers, descend into the belly of the monster[527]
(journey to hell) and spend some time there. (Imprisonment by night in
the sea.)

The battle with the night serpent signifies, therefore, the conquering
of the mother, who is suspected of an infamous crime, that is, the
betrayal of the son. A full confirmation of the connection comes to us
through the fragment of the Babylonian epic of the creation, discovered
by George Smith, mostly from the library of Asurbanipal. The period of
the origin of the text was probably in the time of Hammurabi (2,000
B.C.). We learn from this account of creation[528] that the sun-god Ea,
the son of the depths of the waters and the god of wisdom,[529] had
conquered Apsû. Apsû is the creator of the great gods (he existed in the
beginning in a sort of trinity with Tiâmat—the mother of gods and Mumu,
his vizier). Ea conquered the father, but Tiâmat plotted revenge. She
prepared herself for battle against the gods.

    “Mother Hubur, who created everything,
    Procured invincible weapons, gave birth to giant snakes
    With pointed teeth, relentless in every way;
    Filled their bellies with poison instead of blood,
    Furious gigantic lizards, clothed them with horrors,
    Let them swell with the splendor of horror, formed them rearing,
    Whoever sees them shall die of terror.
    Their bodies shall rear without turning to escape.
    She arrayed the lizards, dragons and Laḫamen,
    Hurricanes, mad dogs, scorpion men,
    Mighty storms, fishmen and rams.
    With relentless weapons, without fear of conflict,
    Powerful are Tiâmat’s commands, irresistible are they.

    “After Tiâmat had powerfully done her work
    She conceived evil against the gods, her descendants;
    In order to revenge Apsu, Tiâmat did evil.
    When Ea now heard this thing
    He became painfully anxious, sorrowfully he sat himself.
    He went to the father, his creator, Ans̆ar,
    To relate to him all that Tiâmat plotted.
    Tiâmat, our mother, has taken an aversion to us,
    Has prepared a riotous mob, furiously raging.”

The gods finally opposed Marduk, the god of spring, the victorious sun,
against the fearful host of Tiâmat. Marduk prepared for battle. Of his
chief weapon, which he created, it is said:

 “He created the evil wind, Imḫullu, the south storm and the hurricane,
 The fourth wind, the seventh wind, the whirlwind and the harmful wind,
 Then let he loose the winds, which he had created, the seven:
 To cause confusion within Tiâmat, they followed behind him,
 Then the lord took up the cyclone, his great weapon;
 For his chariot he mounted the stormwind, the incomparable, the terrible
    one.”

His chief weapon is the wind and a net, with which he will entangle
Tiâmat. He approaches Tiâmat and challenges her to a combat.

   “Then Tiâmat and Marduk, the wise one of the gods, came together,
   Rising for the fight, approaching to the battle:
   Then the lord spread out his net and caught her.
   He let loose the Imḫullu in his train at her face,
   Then Tiâmat now opened her mouth as wide as she could.
   He let the Imḫullu rush in so that her lips could not close;
   With the raging winds he filled her womb.
   Her inward parts were seized and she opened wide her mouth.
   He touched her with the spear, dismembered her body,
   He slashed her inward parts, and cut out her heart,
   Subdued her and put an end to her life.
   He threw down her body and stepped upon it.”

After Marduk slew the mother, he devised the creation of the world.

         “There the lord rested contemplating her body,
         Then divided he the Colossus, planning wisely.
         He cut it apart like a flat fish, into two parts,[530]
         One half he took and with it he covered the Heavens.”

In this manner Marduk created the universe from the mother. It is
clearly evident that the killing of the mother-dragon here takes place
under the idea of a wind fecundation with negative accompaniments.

The world is created from the mother, that is to say, from the libido
taken away from the mother through sacrifice. We shall have to consider
this significant formula more closely in the last chapter. The most
interesting parallels to this primitive myth are to be found in the
literature of the Old Testament, as Gunkel[531] has brilliantly pointed
out. It is worth while to trace the psychology of these parallels.

  _Isaiah_ li:9:

  (9) “Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake as in the
  ancient days, in the generation of old. Art thou not it that hath cut
  Rahab, and wounded the dragon?

  (10) “Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the
  great deep, that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the
  ransomed to pass over?”

The name of Rahab is frequently used for Egypt in the Old Testament,
also dragon. _Isaiah_, chapter xxx, verse 7, calls Egypt “the silent
Rahab,” and means, therefore, something evil and hostile. Rahab is the
well-known whore of Jericho, who later, as the wife of Prince Salma,
became the ancestress of Christ. Here Rahab appeared as the old dragon,
as Tiâmat, against whose evil power Marduk, or Jehovah, marched forth.
The expression “the ransomed” refers to the Jews freed from bondage, but
it is also mythological, for the hero again frees those previously
devoured by the whale. (Frobenius.)

  _Psalm_, lxxxix:10:

  “Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain.”

  _Job_ xxvi:12–13:

  “He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he
  smiteth through the proud.

  “By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens, his hand hath formed the
  crooked serpent.”

Gunkel places Rahab as identical with Chaos, that is, the same as
Tiâmat. Gunkel translates “the breaking to pieces” as “violation.”
Tiâmat or Rahab as the mother is also the whore. Gilgamesh treats Ishtar
in this way when he accuses her of whoredom. This insult towards the
mother is very familiar to us from dream analysis. The dragon Rahab
appears also as Leviathan, the water monster (maternal sea).

  _Psalm_ lxxiv:

  (13) “Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the
  heads of the dragons in the waters.

  (14) “Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces and gavest him to
  be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.

  (15) “Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou didst dry up
  mighty rivers.”

While only the phallic meaning of the Leviathan was emphasized in the
first part of this work, we now discover also the maternal meaning. A
further parallel is:

  _Isaiah_ xxvii:1:

  “In that day, the Lord with his cruel and great and strong sword shall
  punish Leviathan, the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that crooked
  serpent, and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.”

We come upon a special motive in Job, chap. xli, v. 1:

  “Canst thou draw out Leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord
  which thou lettest down? Canst thou put an hook in his nose? or bore
  his jaw through with a thorn?”

Numerous parallels to this motive are to be found among exotic myths in
Frobenius, where the maternal sea monster was also fished for. The
comparison of the mother libido with the elementary powers of the sea
and the powerful monsters borne by the earth show how invincibly great
is the power of that libido which we designate as maternal.

We have already seen that the incest prohibition prevents the son from
reproducing himself through the mother. But this must be done by the
god, as is shown with remarkable clearness and candor in the pious
Egyptian mythology, which has preserved the most ancient and simple
concepts. Thus Chnum, the “moulder,” the “potter,” the “architect,”
moulds his egg upon the potter’s wheel, for he is “the immortal growth,”
“the reproduction of himself and his own rebirth, the creator of the
egg, which emerged from the primitive waters.” In the Book of the Dead
it says:

  “I am the sublime falcon (the Sun-god), which has come forth from his
  egg.”

Another passage in the Book of the Dead reads:

  “I am the creator of Nun, who has taken his place in the underworld.
  My nest is not seen and my egg is not broken.”

A further passage reads:

  “that great and noble god in his egg: who is his own originator of
  that which has arisen from him.”[532]

Therefore, the god Nagaga-uer is also called the “great cackler.” (Book
of the Dead.) “I cackle like a goose and I whistle like a falcon.” The
mother is reproached with the incest prohibition as an act of wilful
maliciousness by which she excludes the son from immortality. Therefore,
a god must at least rebel, overpower and chastise the mother. (Compare
Adam and Lilith, above.) The “overpowering” signifies incestuous
rape.[533] Herodotus[534] has preserved for us a valuable fragment of
this religious phantasy.

  “And how they celebrate their feast to Isis in the city of Busiris, I
  have already previously remarked. After the sacrifice, all of them,
  men and women, full ten thousand people, begin to beat each other. But
  it would be sin for me to mention for whom they do beat each other.

  “But in Papremis they celebrated the sacrifice with holy actions, as
  in the other places. About the time when the sun sets, some few
  priests are busy around the image; most of them stand at the entrance
  with wooden clubs, and others who would fulfil a vow, more than a
  thousand men, also stand in a group with wooden cudgels opposite them.

  “Now on the eve of the festival, they take the image out in a small
  and gilded temple into another sacred edifice. Then the few who remain
  with the image draw a four-wheeled chariot upon which the temple
  stands with the image which it encloses. But the others who stand in
  the anterooms are not allowed to enter. Those under a vow, who stand
  by the god, beat them off. Now occurs a furious battle with clubs, in
  which they bruise each other’s bodies and as I believe, many even die
  from their wounds: notwithstanding this, the Egyptians consider that
  none die.

  “The natives claim that this festival gathering was introduced for the
  following reason: in this sanctuary lived the mother of Ares.[535] Now
  Ares was brought up abroad and when he became a man he came to have
  _intercourse with his mother_. The servants of his mother who had seen
  him did not allow him to enter peacefully, but prevented him; at which
  he fetched people from another city, who mistreated the servants and
  had entrance to his mother. Therefore, they asserted that this
  slaughter was introduced at the feast for Ares.”

It is evident that the pious here fight their way to a share in the
mystery of the raping of the mother.[536] This is the part which belongs
to them,[537] while the heroic deed belongs to the god.[538] By Ares is
meant the Egyptian Typhon, as we have good reasons to suppose. _Thus
Typhon represents the evil longing for the mother_ with which other myth
forms reproach the mother, according to the well-known example. The
death of Balder, quite analogous to the death of Osiris (attack of
sickness of Rê), because of the wounding by the branch of the mistletoe,
seems to need a similar explanation. It is recounted in the myth how all
creatures were pledged not to hurt Balder, save only the mistletoe,
which was forgotten, presumably because it was too young. This killed
Balder. Mistletoe is a parasite. The female piece of wood in the
fire-boring ritual was obtained[539] from the wood of a parasitical or
creeping plant, the fire mother. The “mare” rests upon “Marentak,” in
which Grimm suspects the mistletoe. The mistletoe was a remedy against
barrenness. In Gaul the Druid alone was allowed to climb the holy oak
amid solemn ceremonies after the completed sacrifice, in order to cut
off the ritual mistletoe.[540] This act is a religiously limited and
organized incest. That which grows on the tree is the child,[541] which
man might have by the mother; then man himself would be in a renewed and
rejuvenated form; and precisely this is what man cannot have, because
the incest prohibition forbids it. As the Celtic custom shows, the act
is performed by the priest only, with the observation of certain
ceremonies; the hero god and the redeemer of the world, however, do the
unpermitted, the superhuman thing, and through it purchase immortality.
The dragon, who must be overcome for this purpose, means, as must have
been for some time clearly seen, the resistance against the incest.
Dragon and serpent, especially with the characteristic accumulation of
anxiety attributes, are the symbolic representations of anxiety which
correspond to the repressed incest wish. It is, therefore, intelligible,
when we come across the tree with the snake again and again (in Paradise
the snake even tempts to sin). The snake or dragon possesses in
particular the meaning of treasure guardian and defender. The phallic,
as well as the feminine, meaning of the dragon[542] indicates that it is
again a symbol of the sexual neutral (or bisexual) libido, that is to
say, a symbol of the _libido in opposition_. In this significance the
black horse, Apaosha, the demon of opposition, appears in the old
Persian song, Tishtriya, where it obstructs the sources of the rain
lake. The white horse Tishtriya makes two futile attempts to vanquish
Apaosha; at the third attempt, with the help of Ahuramazda, he is
successful.[543] Whereupon the sluices of heaven open and a fruitful
rain pours down upon the earth.[544] In this song one sees very
beautifully in the choice of symbol how libido is opposed to libido,
will against will, the discordance of primitive man with himself, which
he recognizes again in all the adversity and contrasts of external
nature.

The symbol of the tree encoiled by the serpent may also be translated as
the mother defended from incest by resistance. This symbol is by no
means rare upon Mithraic monuments. The rock encircled by a snake is to
be comprehended similarly, because Mithra is one born from a rock. The
menace of the new-born by the snake (Mithra, Hercules) is made clear
through the legend of Lilith and Lamia. Python, the dragon of Leto, and
Poine, who devastates the land of Crotopus, are sent by the father of
the new-born. This idea indicates the localization, well known in
psychoanalysis, of the incest anxiety in the father. The father
represents the active repulse of the incest wish of the son. The crime,
unconsciously wished for by the son, is imputed to the father under the
guise of a pretended murderous purpose, this being the cause of the
mortal fear of the son for the father, a frequent neurotic symptom. In
conformity with this idea, the monster to be overcome by the young hero
is frequently a giant, the guardian of the treasure or the woman. A
striking example is the giant Chumbaba in the Gilgamesh epic, who
protected the garden of Ishtar;[545] he is overcome by Gilgamesh,
whereby Ishtar is won. Thereupon she makes erotic advances towards
Gilgamesh.[546] This data should be sufficient to render intelligible
the rôle of Horus in Plutarch, especially the violent usage of Isis.
Through overpowering the mother the hero becomes equal to the sun; he
reproduces himself. He wins the strength of the invincible sun, the
power of eternal rejuvenation. We thus understand a series of
representations from the Mithraic myth on the Heddernheim relief. There
we see, first of all, the birth of Mithra from the top of the tree; the
next representation shows him carrying the conquered bull (comparable to
the monstrous bull overcome by Gilgamesh). This bull signifies the
concentrated significance of the monster, the father, who as giant and
dangerous animal embodies the incest prohibition, and agrees with the
individual libido of the sun-hero, which he overcomes by self-sacrifice.
The third picture represents Mithra, when he grasps the head ornament of
the sun, the nimbus. This act recalls to us, first of all, the violence
of Horus towards Isis; secondly, the Christian basic thought, _that
those who have overcome attain the crown of eternal life_. On the fourth
picture Sol kneels before Mithra. These last two representations show
plainly that Mithra has taken to himself the strength of the sun, so
that he becomes the lord of the sun as well. He has conquered “his
animal nature,” the bull. The animal knows no incest prohibition; man
is, therefore, man because he conquers the incest wish, that is, the
animal nature. Thus Mithra has sacrificed his animal nature, the incest
wish, and with that has overcome the mother, that is to say, “the
terrible death-bringing mother.” A solution is already anticipated in
the Gilgamesh epic through the formal renunciation of the horrible
Ishtar by the hero. The overcoming of the mother in the Mithraic
sacrifice, which had almost an ascetic character, took place no longer
by the archaic overpowering, but through the renunciation, the sacrifice
of the wish. The primitive thought of incestuous reproduction through
entrance into the mother’s womb had already been displaced, because man
was so far advanced in domestication that he believed that the eternal
life of the sun is reached, not through the perpetration of incest, but
through the sacrifice of the incest wish. This important change
expressed in the Mithraic mystery finds its full expression for the
first time in the symbol of the crucified God. A bleeding human
sacrifice was hung on the tree of life for Adam’s sins.[547] The
first-born sacrifices its life to the mother when he suffers, hanging on
the branch, a disgraceful and painful death, a mode of death which
belongs to the most ignominious forms of execution, which Roman
antiquity had reserved for only the lowest criminal. Thus the hero dies,
as if he had committed the most shameful crime; he does this by
returning into the birth-giving branch of the tree of life, at the same
time paying for his guilt with the pangs of death. The animal nature is
repressed most powerfully in this deed of the highest courage and the
greatest renunciation; therefore, a greater salvation is to be expected
for humanity, because such a deed alone seems appropriate to expiate
Adam’s guilt.

[Illustration: BULL-SACRIFICE OF MITHRA]

As has already been mentioned, the hanging of the sacrifice on the tree
is a generally widespread ritual custom, Germanic examples being
especially abundant. The ritual consists in the sacrifice being pierced
by a spear.[548] Thus it is said of Odin (Edda, Havamal):

               “I know that I hung on the windswept tree
               Nine nights through,
               Wounded by a spear, dedicated to Odin
               I myself to myself.”

The hanging of the sacrifice to the cross also occurred in America prior
to its discovery. Müller[549] mentions the Fejervaryian manuscript (a
Mexican hieroglyphic kodex), at the conclusion of which there is a
colossal cross, in the middle of which there hangs a bleeding divinity.
Equally interesting is the cross of Palenque;[550] up above is a bird,
on either side two human figures, who look at the cross and hold a child
against it either for sacrifice or baptism. The old Mexicans are said to
have invoked the favor of Centeotls, “the daughter of heaven and the
goddess of wheat,” every spring by nailing upon the cross a youth or a
maiden and by shooting the sacrifice with arrows.[551] The name of the
Mexican cross signifies “tree of our life or flesh.”[552]

An effigy from the Island of Philae represents Osiris in the form of a
crucified god, wept over by Isis and Nephthys, the sister consort.[553]

The meaning of the cross is certainly not limited to the tree of life,
as has already been shown. Just as the tree of life has also a phallic
sub-meaning (as libido symbol), so there is a further significance to
the cross than life and immortality.[554] Müller uses it as a sign of
rain and of fertility, because it appears among the Indians distinctly
as a magic charm of fertility. It goes without saying, therefore, that
it plays a rôle in the sun cult. It is also noteworthy that the sign of
the cross is an important sign for the keeping away of all evil, like
the ancient gesture of Manofica. The phallic amulets also serve the same
purpose. Zöckler appears to have overlooked the fact that the phallic
Crux Ansata is the same cross which has flourished in countless examples
in the soil of antiquity. Copies of this Crux Ansata are found in many
places, and almost every collection of antiquities possesses one or more
specimens.[555]

Finally, it must be mentioned that the form of the human body is
imitated in the cross as of a man with arms outspread. It is remarkable
that in early Christian representations Christ is not nailed to the
cross, but stands before it with arms outstretched.[556] Maurice[557]
gives a striking basis for this interpretation when he says:

  “It is a fact not less remarkable than well attested, that the Druids
  in their groves were accustomed to select the most stately and
  beautiful tree as an emblem of the deity they adored, and cutting off
  the side branches, they affixed two of the largest of them to the
  highest part of the trunk, in such a manner that those branches
  extended on each side like the arms of a man, and together with the
  body presented the appearance of a huge cross; and in the bark in
  several places was also inscribed the letter Τ (tau).”[558]

“The tree of knowledge” of the Hindoo Dschaina sect assumes human form;
it was represented as a mighty, thick trunk in the form of a human head,
from the top of which grew out two longer branches hanging down at the
sides and one short, vertical, uprising branch crowned by a bud or
blossom-like thickening.[559] Robertson in his “Evangelical Myths”
mentions that in the Assyrian system there exists the representation of
the divinity in the form of a cross, in which the vertical beam
corresponds to a human form and the horizontal beam to a pair of
conventionalized wings. Old Grecian idols such, for example, as were
found in large numbers in Aegina have a similar character, an
immoderately long head and arms slightly raised, wing-shaped, and in
front distinct breasts.[560]

I must leave it an open question as to whether the symbol of the cross
has any relation to the two pieces of wood in the religious fire
production, as is frequently claimed. It does appear, however, as if the
cross symbol actually still possessed the significance of “union,” for
this idea belongs to the fertility charm, and especially to the thought
of eternal rebirth, which is most intimately bound up with the cross.
The thought of “union,” expressed by the symbol of the cross, is met
with in “Timaios” of Plato, where the world soul is conceived as
stretched out between heaven and earth in the form of an X (Chi); hence
in the form of a “St. Andrew’s cross.” When we now learn, furthermore,
that the world soul contains in itself _the world as a body_, then this
picture inevitably reminds us of the mother.

  (_Dialogues of Plato._ Jowett, Vol. II, page 528.)

  “And in the center he put the soul, which he diffused through the
  whole, and also spread over all the body round about, and he made one
  solitary and only heaven, a circle moving in a circle, having such
  excellence as to be able to hold converse with itself, and needing no
  other friendship or acquaintance. Having these purposes in view he
  created the world to be a blessed god.”

This highest degree of inactivity and freedom from desire, symbolized
by the _being enclosed within itself_, signifies divine blessedness.
The only human prototype of this conception is the child in the
mother’s womb, or rather more, the adult man in the continuous embrace
of the mother, from whom he originates. Corresponding to this
mythologic-philosophic conception, the enviable Diogenes inhabited a
tub, thus giving mythologic expression to the blessedness and
resemblance to the Divine in his freedom from desire. Plato says as
follows of the bond of the world soul to the world body:

  “Now God did not make the soul after the body, although we have spoken
  of them in this order; for when he put them together he would never
  have allowed that the elder should serve the younger, but this is what
  we say at random, because we ourselves too are very largely affected
  by chance. Whereas he made the soul in origin and excellence prior to
  and older than the body, to be the ruler and mistress, of whom the
  body was to be the subject.”

It seems conceivable from other indications that the conception of the
soul in general is a derivative of the mother-imago, that is to say, a
symbolic designation for the amount of libido remaining in the
mother-imago. (Compare the Christian representation of the soul as the
bride of Christ.) The further development of the world soul in “Timaios”
takes place in an obscure fashion in mystic numerals. When the mixture
was completed the following occurred:

  “This entire compound he divided lengthways into two parts, which he
  joined to one another at the center like the figure of an X.”

This passage approaches very closely the division and union of Atman,
who, after the division, is compared to a man and a woman who hold each
other in an embrace. Another passage is worth mentioning:

  “After the entire union of the soul had taken place, according to the
  master’s mind, he formed all that is corporeal within this, and joined
  it together so as to penetrate it throughout.”

Moreover, I refer to my remarks about the maternal meaning of the world
soul in Plotinus, in Chapter II.

A similar detachment of the symbol of the cross from a concrete figure
we find among the Muskhogean Indians, who stretch above the surface of
the water (pond or stream) two ropes crosswise and at the point of
intersection throw into the water fruits, oil and precious stones as a
sacrifice.[561] Here the divinity is evidently the water, not the cross,
which designates the place of sacrifice only, through the point of
intersection. The sacrifice at the place of union indicates why this
symbol was a primitive charm of fertility,[562] why we meet it so
frequently in the prechristian era among the goddesses of love (mother
goddesses), especially among the Egyptians in Isis and the sun-god. We
have already discussed the continuous union of these two divinities. As
the cross (Tau [Τ], Crux Ansata) always recurs in the hand of Tum, the
supreme God, the hegemon of the Ennead, it may not be superfluous to say
something more of the destination of Tum. The Tum of On-Heliopolis bears
the name “the father of his mother”; what that means needs no
explanation; Jusas or Nebit-Hotpet, the goddess joined to him, _was
called sometimes the mother, sometimes the daughter, sometimes the wife
of the god_. The day of the beginning of autumn is designated in the
Heliopolitan inscriptions as the “festival of the goddess Jusasit,” as
“the arrival of the sister for the purpose of uniting with her father.”
It is the day in which “the goddess Mehnit completes her work, so that
the god Osiris may enter into the left eye.” (By which the moon is
meant.[563]) The day is also called the filling up of the sacred eye
with its needs. The heavenly cow with the moon eye, the cow-headed Isis,
takes to herself in the autumn equinox the seed which procreates Horus.
(Moon as keeper of the seed.) The “eye” evidently represents the
genitals, as in the myth of Indra, who had to bear spread over his whole
body the likeness of Yoni (vulva), on account of a Bathsheba outrage,
but was so far pardoned by the gods that the disgraceful likeness of
Yoni was changed into eyes.[564] The “pupil” in the eye is a child. The
great god becomes a child again; he enters the mother’s womb in order to
renew himself.[565] In a hymn it is said:

  “Thy mother, the heavens, stretches forth her arms to thee.”

In another place it is said:

  “Thou shinest, oh father of the gods, upon the back of thy mother,
  daily thy mother takes thee in her arms. When thou illuminatest the
  dwelling of night, thou unitest with thy mother, the heavens.”[566]

The Tum of Pitum-Heliopolis not only bears the Crux Ansata as a symbol,
but also has this sign as his most frequent surname, that is, ānχ or
ānχi, which means “life” or “the living.” He is chiefly honored as the
demon serpent, Agatho, of whom it is said, “The holy demon serpent
Agatho goes forth from the city Nezi.” The snake, on account of casting
its skin, is the symbol of renewal, as is the scarabæus, a symbol of the
sun, of whom it is said that he, being of masculine sex only, reproduces
himself.

The name Chnum (another name for Tum, always meaning “the sun-god”)
comes from the verb χnum, which means “to bind together, to unite.”[567]
Chnum appears chiefly as the potter, the moulder of his egg. The cross
seems, therefore, to be an extraordinarily condensed symbol; its supreme
meaning is that of the tree of life, and, therefore, is a symbol of the
mother. The symbolization in a human form is, therefore, intelligible.
The phallic forms of the Crux Ansata belong to the abstract meaning of
“life” and “fertility,” as well as to the meaning of “union,” which we
can now very properly interpret as _cohabitation with the mother for the
purpose of renewal_.[568] It is, therefore, not only a very touching but
also a very significant naïve symbolism when Mary, in an Old English
lament of the Virgin,[569] accuses the cross of being a false tree,
which unjustly and without reason destroyed “the pure fruit of her body,
her gentle birdling,” with a poisonous draught, the draught of death,
which is destined only for the guilty descendants of the sinner Adam.
Her son was not a sharer in that guilt. (Compare with this the cunning
of Isis with the fatal draught of love.) Mary laments:

  “Cross, thou art the evil stepmother of my son, so high hast thou hung
  him that I cannot even kiss his feet! Cross, thou art my mortal enemy,
  thou hast slain my little blue bird!”

The holy cross answers:

  “Woman, I thank thee for my honor: thy splendid fruit, which now I
  bear, shines as a red blossom.[570] Not alone to save thee but to save
  the whole world this precious flower blooms in thee.”[571]

Santa Crux says of the relation to each other of the two mothers (Isis
in the morning and Isis in the evening):

  “Thou hast been crowned as Queen of Heaven on account of the child,
  which thou hast borne. But I shall appear as the shining relic to the
  whole world, at the day of judgment. I shall then raise my lament for
  thy divine son innocently slain upon me.”

Thus the murderous mother of death unites with the mother of life in
bringing forth a child. In their lament for the dying God, and as
outward token of their union, Mary kisses the cross, and is reconciled
to it.[572] The naïve Egyptian antiquity has preserved for us the union
of the contrasting tendencies in the mother idea of Isis. Naturally this
imago is merely a symbol of the libido of the son for the mother, and
describes the conflict between love and incest resistance. The criminal
incestuous purpose of the son appears projected as criminal cunning in
the mother-imago. The separation of the son from the mother signifies
the separation of man from the generic consciousness of animals, from
that infantile archaic thought characterized by the absence of
individual consciousness.

It was only the power of the incest prohibition which created the
self-conscious individual, who formerly had been thoughtlessly one with
the tribe, and in this way alone did the idea of individual and final
death become possible. Thus through the sin of Adam death came into the
world. This, as is evident, is expressed figuratively, that is, in
contrast form. The mother’s defence against the incest appears to the
son as a malicious act, which delivers him over to the fear of death.
This conflict faces us in the Gilgamesh epic in its original freshness
and passion, where also the incest wish is projected onto the mother.

The neurotic who cannot leave the mother has good reasons; the fear of
death holds him there. It seems as if no idea and no word were strong
enough to express the meaning of this. Entire religions were constructed
in order to give words to the immensity of this conflict. This struggle
for expression which continued down through the centuries certainly
cannot have its source in the restricted realm of the vulgar conception
of incest. Rather one must understand the law which is ultimately
expressed as “Incest prohibition” as coercion to domestication, and
consider the religious systems as institutions which first receive, then
organize and gradually sublimate, the motor forces of the animal nature
not immediately available for cultural purposes.

We will now return to the visions of Miss Miller. Those now following
need no further detailed discussion. The next vision is the image of a
“purple bay.” The symbolism of the sea connects smoothly with that which
precedes. One might think here in addition of the reminiscences of the
Bay of Naples, which we came across in Part I. In the sequence of the
whole, however, we must not overlook the significance of the “bay.” In
French it is called _une baie_, which probably corresponds to a bay in
the English text. It might be worth while here to glance at the
etymological side of this idea. Bay is generally used for something
which is open, just as the Catalonian word _badia_ (_bai_) comes from
_badar_, “to open.” In French _bayer_ means “to have the mouth open, to
gape.” Another word for the same is _Meerbusen_, “bay or gulf”; Latin
_sinus_, and a third word is golf (gulf), which in French stands in
closest relation to _gouffre_ = abyss. Golf is derived from
“κόλπος,”[573] which also means “bosom” and “womb,” “mother-womb,” also
“vagina.” It can also mean a fold of a dress or pocket; it may also mean
a deep valley between high mountains. These expressions clearly show
what primitive ideas lie at their base. They render intelligible
Goethe’s choice of words at that place where Faust wishes to follow the
sun with winged desire in order in the everlasting day “to drink its
eternal light”:

             “The mountain chain with all its gorges deep,
             Would then no more impede my godlike motion;
             And now before mine eyes expands the ocean,
             With all its bays, in shining sleep!”

Faust’s desire, like that of every hero, inclines towards the mysteries
of rebirth, of immortality; therefore, his course leads to the sea, and
down into the monstrous jaws of death, the horror and narrowness of
which at the same time signify the new day.

      “Out on the open ocean speeds my dreaming:
      The glassy flood before my feet is gleaming,
      A new day beckons to a newer shore!
      A fiery chariot borne on buoyant pinions,
      Sweeps near me now! I soon shall ready be
      To pierce the ether’s high, unknown dominions,
      To reach new spheres of pure activity!
      This Godlike rapture, this supreme existence....

             ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

      “Yes, let me dare those gates to fling asunder,
      Which every man would fain go slinking by!
      ’Tis time, through deeds this word of truth to thunder;
      That with the height of God’s Man’s dignity may vie!
      Nor from that gloomy gulf to shrink affrighted,
      Where fancy doth herself to self-born pangs compel,—
      To struggle toward that pass benighted,
      Around whose narrow mouth flame all the fires of Hell:—
      To take this step with cheerful resolution,
      Though Nothingness should be the certain swift conclusion!”

It sounds like a confirmation, when the succeeding vision of Miss
Miller’s is _une falaise à pic_, “a steep, precipitous cliff.” (Compare
_gouffre_.) The entire series of individual visions is completed, as the
author observes, by a confusion of sounds, somewhat resembling “wa-ma,
wa-ma.” This has a very primitive, barbaric sound. Since we learn from
the author nothing of the subjective roots of this sound, nothing is
left us but the suspicion that this sound might be considered, taken in
connection with the whole, as a slight mutilation of the well-known call
ma-ma.




                               CHAPTER VI
               THE BATTLE FOR DELIVERANCE FROM THE MOTHER


There now comes a pause in the production of visions by Miss Miller;
then the activity of the unconscious is resumed very energetically.

A forest with trees and bushes appears.

After the discussions in the preceding chapter, there is need only of a
hint that the symbol of the forest coincides essentially with the
meaning of the holy tree. The holy tree is found generally in a sacred
forest enclosure or in the garden of Paradise. The sacred grove often
takes the place of the taboo tree and assumes all the attributes of the
latter. The erotic symbolism of the garden is generally known. The
forest, like the tree, has mythologically a maternal significance. In
the vision which now follows, the forest furnishes the stage upon which
the dramatic representation of the end of Chiwantopel is played. This
act, therefore, takes place in or near the mother.

First, I will give the beginning of the drama as it is in the original
text, up to the first attempt at sacrifice. At the beginning of the next
chapter the reader will find the continuation, the monologue and the
sacrificial scene. The drama begins as follows:

  “The personage Chiwantopel, came from the south, on horseback; around
  him a cloak of vivid colors, red, blue and white. An Indian in a
  costume of doe skin, covered with beads and ornamented with feathers
  advances, squats down and prepares to let fly an arrow at Chiwantopel.
  The latter presents his breast in an attitude of defiance, and the
  Indian, fascinated by that sight, slinks away and disappears within
  the forest.”

The hero, Chiwantopel, appears on horseback. This fact seems of
importance, because as the further course of the drama shows (see
Chapter VIII) the horse plays no indifferent rôle, but suffers the same
death as the hero, and is even called “faithful brother” by the latter.
These allusions point to a remarkable similarity between horse and
rider. There seems to exist an intimate connection between the two,
which guides them to the same destiny. We already have seen that the
symbolization of “the libido in resistance” through the “terrible
mother” in some places runs parallel with the horse.[574] Strictly
speaking, it would be incorrect to say that the horse is, or means, the
mother. The mother idea is a libido symbol, and the horse is also a
libido symbol, and at some points the two symbols intersect in their
significances. The common feature of the two ideas lies in the libido,
especially in the libido repressed from incest. The hero and the horse
appear to us in this setting like an artistic formation of the idea of
humanity with its repressed libido, whereby the horse acquires the
significance of the animal unconscious, which appears domesticated and
subjected to the will of man. Agni upon the ram, Wotan upon Sleipneir,
Ahuramazda upon Angromainyu,[575] Jahwe upon the monstrous seraph,
Christ upon the ass,[576] Dionysus upon the ass, Mithra upon the horse,
Men upon the human-footed horse, Freir upon the golden-bristled boar,
etc., are parallel representations. The chargers of mythology are always
invested with great significance; they very often appear
anthropomorphized. Thus, Men’s horse has human forelegs; Balaam’s ass,
human speech; the retreating bull, upon whose back Mithra springs in
order to strike him down, is, according to a Persian legend, actually
the God himself. The mock crucifix of the Palatine represents the
crucified with an ass’s head, perhaps in reference to the ancient legend
that in the temple of Jerusalem the image of an ass was worshipped. As
Drosselbart (horse’s mane) Wotan is half-human, half-horse.[577] An old
German riddle very prettily shows this unity between horse and
horseman.[578] “Who are the two, who travel to Thing? Together they have
three eyes, ten feet[579] and one tail; and thus they travel over the
land.” Legends ascribe properties to the horse, which psychologically
belong to the unconscious of man; horses are clairvoyant and
clairaudient; they show the way when the lost wanderer is helpless; they
have mantic powers. In the Iliad the horse prophesies evil. They hear
the words which the corpse speaks when it is taken to the grave—words
which men cannot hear. Cæsar learned from his human-footed horse
(probably taken from the identification of Cæsar with the Phrygian Men)
that he was to conquer the world. An ass prophesied to Augustus the
victory of Actium. The horse also sees phantoms. All these things
correspond to typical manifestations of the unconscious. Therefore, it
is perfectly intelligible that the horse, as the image of the wicked
animal component of man, has manifold connections with the devil. The
devil has a horse’s foot; in certain circumstances a horse’s form. At
crucial moments he suddenly shows a cloven foot (proverbial) in the same
way as in the abduction of Hadding, Sleipneir suddenly looked out from
behind Wotan’s mantle.[580] Just as the nightmare rides on the sleeper,
so does the devil, and, therefore, it is said that those who have
nightmares are ridden by the devil. In Persian lore the devil is the
steed of God. The devil, like all evil things, represents sexuality.
Witches have intercourse with him, in which case he appears in the form
of a goat or horse. The unmistakably phallic nature of the devil is
communicated to the horse as well; hence this symbol occurs in
connections where this is the only meaning which would furnish an
explanation. It is to be mentioned that Loki generates in the form of a
horse, just as does the devil when in horse’s form, as an old fire god.
Thus the lightning was represented theriomorphically as a horse.[581] An
uneducated hysteric told me that as a child she had suffered from
extreme fear of thunder, because every time the lightning flashed she
saw immediately afterwards a huge black horse reaching upwards as far as
the sky.[582] It is said in a legend that the devil, as the divinity of
lightning, casts a horse’s foot (lightning) upon the roofs. In
accordance with the primitive meaning of thunder as fertilizer of the
earth, the phallic meaning is given both to lightning and the horse’s
foot. In mythology the horse’s foot really has the phallic function as
in this dream. An uneducated patient who originally had been violently
forced to coitus by her husband very often dreams (after separation)
that a wild horse springs upon her and kicks her in the abdomen with his
hind foot. Plutarch has given us the following words of a prayer from
the Dionysus orgies:

  ἐλθεῖν ἥρως Διόνυσε Ἄλιον ἐς ναὸν ἁγνὸν σὺν Χαρίτεσσιν ἐς ναὸν τῷ βοέῳ
  ποδὶ θύων, ἄξιε ταῦρε, ἄξιε ταῦρε.[583][584]

Pegasus with his foot strikes out of the earth the spring Hippocrene.
Upon a Corinthian statue of Bellerophon, which was also a fountain, the
water flowed out from the horse’s hoof. Balder’s horse gave rise to a
spring through his kick. Thus the horse’s foot is the dispenser of
fruitful moisture.[585] A legend of lower Austria, told by Jaehns,
informs us that a gigantic man on a white horse is sometimes seen riding
over the mountains. This means a speedy rain. In the German legend the
goddess of birth, Frau Holle, appears on horseback. Pregnant women near
confinement are prone to give oats to a white horse from their aprons
and to pray him to give them a speedy delivery. It was originally the
custom for the horse to rub against the woman’s genitals. The horse
(like the ass) had in general the significance of a priapic animal.[586]
Horse’s tracks are idols dispensing blessing and fertility. Horse’s
tracks established a claim, and were of significance in determining
boundaries, like the priaps of Latin antiquity. Like the phallic
Dactyli, a horse opened the mineral riches of the Harz Mountains with
his hoof. The horseshoe, an equivalent for horse’s foot,[587] brings
luck and has apotropaic meaning. In the Netherlands an entire horse’s
foot is hung up in the stable to ward against sorcery. The analogous
effect of the phallus is well known; hence the phalli at the gates. In
particular the horse’s leg turned lightning aside, according to the
principle “similia similibus.”

Horses also symbolize the wind, that is to say, the tertium
comparationis is again the libido symbol. The German legend recognizes
the wind as the wild huntsman in pursuit of the maiden. Stormy regions
frequently derive their names from horses, as the White Horse Mountain
of the Lüneburger heath. The centaurs are typical wind gods, and have
been represented as such by Böcklin’s artistic intuition.[588]

Horses also signify fire and light. The fiery horses of Helios are an
example. The horses of Hector are called Xanthos (yellow, bright),
Podargos (swift-footed), Lampos (shining) and Aithon (burning). A very
pronounced fire symbolism was represented by the mystic Quadriga,
mentioned by Dio Chrysostomus. The supreme God always drives his chariot
in a circle. Four horses are harnessed to the chariot. The horse driven
on the periphery moves very quickly. He has a shining coat, and bears
upon it the signs of the planets and the Zodiac.[589] This is a
representation of the rotary fire of heaven. The second horse moves more
slowly, and is illuminated only on one side. The third moves still more
slowly, and the fourth rotates around himself. But once the outer horse
set the second horse on fire with his fiery breath, and the third
flooded the fourth with his streaming sweat. Then the horses dissolve
and pass over into the substance of the strongest and most fiery, which
now becomes the charioteer. The horses also represent the four elements.
The catastrophe signifies the conflagration of the world and the deluge,
whereupon the division of the God into many parts ceases, and the divine
unity is restored.[590] Doubtless the Quadriga may be understood
astronomically as a _symbol of time_. We already saw in the first part
that the stoic representation of Fate is a fire symbol. It is,
therefore, a logical continuation of the thought, when time, closely
related to the conception of destiny, exhibits this same libido
symbolism. Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad, i: 1, says:

  “The morning glow verily is the head of the sacrificial horse, the sun
  his eye, the wind his breath, the all-spreading fire his mouth, the
  year is the belly of the sacrificial horse. The sky is his back, the
  atmosphere the cavern of his body, the earth the vault of his belly.
  The poles are his sides, in between the poles his ribs, the seasons
  his limbs, the months and fortnights his joints. Days and nights are
  his feet, stars his bones, clouds his flesh. The food he digests is
  the deserts, the rivers are his veins, the mountains his liver and
  lungs, the herbs and trees his hair; the rising sun is his fore part,
  the setting sun his after part. The ocean is his kinsman, the sea his
  cradle.”

The horse undoubtedly here stands for a time symbol, and also for the
entire world. We come across in the Mithraic religion, a strange God of
Time, Aion, called Kronos or Deus Leontocephalus, because his
stereotyped representation is a lion-headed man, who, standing in a
rigid attitude, is encoiled by a snake, whose head projects forward from
behind over the lion’s head. The figure holds in each hand a key, on the
chest rests a thunderbolt, upon his back are the four wings of the wind;
in addition to that, the figure sometimes bears the Zodiac on his body.
Additional attributes are a cock and implements. In the Carolingian
psalter of Utrecht, which is based upon ancient models, the Sæculum-Aion
is represented as a naked man with a snake in his hand. As is suggested
by the name of the divinity, he is a symbol of time, most interestingly
composed from libido symbols. The lion, the zodiac sign of the greatest
summer heat,[591] is the symbol of the most mighty desire. (“My soul
roars with the voice of a hungry lion,” says Mechthild of Magdeburg.) In
the Mithra mystery the serpent is often antagonistic to the lion,
corresponding to that very universal myth of the battle of the sun with
the dragon.

In the Egyptian Book of the Dead, Tum is even designated as a he-cat,
because as such he fought the snake, Apophis. The encoiling also means
the engulfing, the entering into the mother’s womb. Thus time is defined
by the rising and setting of the sun, that is to say, through the death
and renewal of the libido. The addition of the cock again suggests time,
and the addition of implements suggests the creation through time.
(“Durée créatrice,” Bergson.) Oromazdes and Ahriman were produced
through Zrwanakarana, the “infinitely long duration.” Time, this empty
and purely formal concept, is expressed in the mysteries by
transformations of the creative power, the libido. Macrobius says:

  “Leonis capite monstratur praesens tempus—quia conditio ejus valida
  fervensque est.”[592]

Philo of Alexandria has a better understanding:

  “Tempus ab hominibus pessimis putatur deus volentibus Ens essentiale
  abscondere—pravis hominibus tempus putatur causa rerum mundi,
  sapientibus vero et optimis non tempus sed Deus.”[593][594]

In Firdusi[595] time is often the symbol of fate, the libido nature of
which we have already learned to recognize. The Hindoo text mentioned
above includes still more—its symbol of the horse contains the whole
world; his kinsman and his cradle is the sea, the mother, similar to the
world soul, the maternal significance of which we have seen above. Just
as Aion represents the libido in an embrace, that is to say, in the
state of death and of rebirth, so here the cradle of the horse is the
sea, i. e. the libido is in the mother, dying and rising again, like the
symbol of the dying and resurrected Christ, who hangs like ripe fruit
upon the tree of life.

We have already seen that the horse is connected through Ygdrasil with
the symbolism of the tree. The horse is also a “tree of death”; thus in
the Middle Ages the funeral pyre was called St. Michael’s horse, and the
neo-Persian word for coffin means “wooden horse.”[596] The horse has
also the rôle of psycho-pompos; he is the steed to conduct the souls to
the other world—horsewomen fetch the souls (Valkyries). Neo-Greek songs
represent Charon on a horse. These definitions obviously lead to the
mother symbolism. The Trojan horse was the only means by which the city
could be conquered; because only he who has entered the mother and been
reborn is an invincible hero. The Trojan horse is a magic charm, like
the “Nodfyr,” which also serves to overcome necessity. The formula
evidently reads, “In order to overcome the difficulty, thou must commit
incest, and once more be born from thy mother.” It appears that striking
a nail into the sacred tree signifies something very similar. The “Stock
im Eisen” in Vienna seems to have been such a palladium.

Still another symbolic form is to be considered. Occasionally the devil
rides upon a three-legged horse. The Goddess of Death, Hel, in time of
pestilence, also rides upon a three-legged horse.[597] The gigantic ass,
which is three-legged, stands in the heavenly rain lake Vourukasha; his
urine purifies the water of the lake, and from his roar all useful
animals become pregnant and all harmful animals miscarry. The Triad
further points to the phallic significance. The contrasting symbolism of
Hel is blended into one conception in the ass of Vourukasha. The libido
is fructifying as well as destroying.

These definitions, as a whole, plainly reveal the fundamental features.
The horse is a libido symbol, partly of phallic, partly of maternal
significance, like the tree. It represents the libido in this
application, that is, the libido repressed through the incest
prohibition.

In the Miller drama an Indian approaches the hero, ready to shoot an
arrow at him. Chiwantopel, however, with a proud gesture, exposes his
breast to the enemy. This idea reminds the author of the scene between
Cassius and Brutus in Shakespeare’s “Julius Cæsar.” A misunderstanding
has arisen between the two friends, when Brutus reproaches Cassius for
withholding from him the money for the legions. Cassius, irritable and
angry, breaks out into the complaint:

        “Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
        Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
        For Cassius is a-weary of the world:
        Hated by one he loves: braved by his brother:
        Check’d like a bondman; _all his faults observed_:
        Set in a note-book, learn’d and conn’d by rote,
        To cast into my teeth. O I could weep
        My spirit from mine eyes!—There is my dagger,
        And here my naked breast; within, a heart
        Dearer than Plutus’ mine, richer than gold:
        If that thou beest a Roman, take it forth:
        I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
        Strike, as thou didst at Cæsar; for I know
        When thou didst hate him worst, thou lov’dst him better
        Than ever thou lov’dst Cassius.”

The material here would be incomplete without mentioning the fact that
this speech of Cassius shows many analogies to the agonized delirium of
Cyrano (compare Part I), only Cassius is far more theatrical and
overdrawn. Something childish and hysterical is in his manner. Brutus
does not think of killing him, but administers a very chilling rebuke in
the following dialogue:

     BRUTUS: Sheathe your dagger:
             Be angry when you will, it shall have scope:
             Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
             _O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb_
             That carries anger as the flint bears fire:
             Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
             And straight is cold again.

     CASSIUS:                            Hath Cassius liv’d
             To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus
             When grief and blood ill-tempered vexeth him?

     BRUTUS: When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered too.

     CASSIUS: Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.

     BRUTUS: And my heart too.

     CASSIUS:                  O Brutus!

     BRUTUS:                             What’s the matter?

     CASSIUS: Have not you love enough to bear with me
              When that rash humor _which my mother gave me_
              Makes me forgetful?

     BRUTUS:                      Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth
              When you are over earnest with your Brutus,
              He’ll think your mother chides and leave you so.

The analytic interpretation of Cassius’s irritability plainly reveals
that at these moments he identifies himself with the mother, and his
conduct, therefore, is truly feminine, as his speech demonstrates most
excellently. For his womanish love-seeking and desperate subjection
under the proud masculine will of Brutus calls forth the friendly remark
of the latter, that Cassius is yoked with a lamb, that is to say, has
something very weak in his character, which is derived from the mother.
One recognizes in this without any difficulty the analytic hall-marks of
an infantile disposition, which, as always, is characterized by a
prevalence of the parent-imago, here the mother-imago. An infantile
individual is infantile because he has freed himself insufficiently, or
not at all, from the childish environment, that is, from his adaptation
to his parents. Therefore, on one side, he reacts falsely towards the
world, as a child towards his parents, always demanding love and
immediate reward for his feelings; on the other side, on account of the
close connection to the parents, he identifies himself with them. The
infantile individual behaves like the father and mother. He is not in a
condition to live for himself and to find the place to which he belongs.
Therefore, Brutus very justly takes it for granted that the “mother
chides” in Cassius, not he himself. The psychologically valuable fact
which we gather here is the information _that Cassius is infantile and
identified_ with the mother. The hysterical behavior is due to the
circumstance that Cassius is still, in part, a lamb, and _an innocent
and entirely harmless child_. He remains, as far as his emotional life
is concerned, still far behind himself. This we often see among people
who, as masters, apparently govern life and fellow-creatures; they have
remained children in regard to the demands of their love nature.

The figures of the Miller dramas, being children of the creator’s
phantasy, depict, as is natural, those traits of character which belong
to the author. The hero, the wish figure, is represented as most
distinguished, because the hero always combines in himself all
wished-for ideals. Cyrano’s attitude is certainly beautiful and
impressive; Cassius’s behavior has a theatrical effect. Both heroes
prepare to die effectively, in which attempt Cyrano succeeds. This
attitude betrays a wish for death in the unconscious of our author, the
meaning of which we have already discussed at length as the motive for
her poem of the moth. The wish of young girls to die is only an indirect
expression, which remains a pose, even in case of real death, for death
itself can be a pose. Such an outcome merely adds beauty and value to
the pose under certain conditions. That the highest summit of life is
expressed through the symbolism of death is a well-known fact; for
creation beyond one’s self means personal death. The coming generation
is the end of the preceding one. This symbolism is frequent in erotic
speech. The lascivious speech between Lucius and the wanton servant-maid
in Apuleius (“Metamorphoses,” lib. ii: 32) is one of the clearest
examples:

  “Proeliare, inquit, et fortiter proeliare: nec enim tibi cedam, nec
  terga vortam. Cominus in aspectum, si vir es, dirige; et grassare
  naviter, et occide moriturus. Hodierna pugna non habet
  missionem.—Simul ambo corruimus inter mutuos amplexus animas
  anhelantes.”[598]

This symbolism is extremely significant, because it shows how easily a
contrasting expression originates and how equally intelligible and
characteristic such an expression is. The proud gesture with which the
hero offers himself to death may very easily be an indirect expression
which challenges the pity or sympathy of the other, and thus is doomed
to the calm analytic reduction to which Brutus proceeds. The behavior of
Chiwantopel is also suspicious, because the Cassius scene which serves
as its model betrays indiscreetly that the whole affair is merely
infantile and one which owes its origin to an overactive mother imago.
When we compare this piece with the series of mother symbols brought to
light in the previous chapter, we must say that the Cassius scene merely
confirms once more what we have long supposed, that is to say, that the
motor power of these symbolic visions arises from an infantile mother
transference, that is to say, from an undetached bond to the mother.

In the drama the libido, in contradistinction to the inactive nature of
the previous symbols, assumes a threatening activity, a conflict
becoming evident, in which the one part threatens the other with murder.
The hero, as the ideal image of the dreamer, is inclined to die; he does
not fear death. In accordance with the infantile character of this hero,
it would most surely be time for him to take his departure from the
stage, or, in childish language, to die. Death is to come to him in the
form of an arrow-wound. Considering the fact that heroes themselves are
very often great archers or succumb to an arrow-wound (St. Sebastian, as
an example), it may not be superfluous to inquire into the meaning of
death through an arrow.

We read in the biography of the stigmatized nun Katherine Emmerich[599]
the following description of the evidently neurotic sickness of her
heart:

  “When only in her novitiate, she received as a Christmas present from
  the holy Christ a very tormenting heart trouble for the whole period
  of her nun’s life. God showed her inwardly the purpose; it was on
  account of the decline of the spirit of the order, especially for the
  sins of her fellow-sisters. But what rendered this trouble most
  painful was the gift which she had possessed from youth, namely, to
  see before her eyes the inner nature of man as he really was. She felt
  the heart trouble physically as if her heart was continually pierced
  by arrows.[600] These arrows—and this represented the still worse
  mental suffering—she recognized as the thoughts, plots, secret
  speeches, misunderstandings, scandal and uncharitableness, in which
  her fellow-sisters, wholly without reason and unscrupulously, were
  engaged against her and her god-fearing way of life.”

It is difficult to be a saint, because even a patient and long-suffering
nature will not readily bear such a violation, and defends itself in its
own way. The companion of sanctity is temptation, without which no true
saint can live. We know from analytic experience that these temptations
can pass unconsciously, so that only their equivalents would be produced
in consciousness in the form of symptoms. We know that it is proverbial
that heart and smart (Herz and Schmerz) rhyme. It is a well-known fact
that hysterics put a physical pain in place of a mental pain. The
biographer of Emmerich has comprehended that very correctly. Only her
interpretation of the pain is, as usual, projected. It is always the
others who secretly assert all sorts of evil things about her, and this
she pretended gave her the pains.[601] The case, however, bears a
somewhat different aspect. The very difficult renunciation of all life’s
joys, this death before the bloom, is generally painful, and especially
painful are the unfulfilled wishes and the attempts of the animal nature
to break through the power of repression. The gossip and jokes of the
sisters very naturally centre around these most painful things, so that
it must appear to the saint as if her symptoms were caused by this.
Naturally, again, she could not know that gossip tends to assume the
rôle of the unconscious, which, like a clever adversary, always aims at
the actual gaps in our armor.

A passage from Gautama Buddha embodies this idea:[602]

                  “A wish earnestly desired
                  Produced by will, and nourished
                  When gradually it must be thwarted,
                  Burrows like an arrow in the flesh.”

The wounding and painful arrows do not come from without through gossip,
which only attacks externally, but they come from ambush, from our own
unconscious. This, rather than anything external, creates the
defenseless suffering. It is our _own repressed and unrecognized desires
which fester like arrows in our flesh_.[603] In another connection this
was clear to the nun, and that most literally. It is a well-known fact,
and one which needs no further proof to those who understand, that these
mystic scenes of union with the Saviour generally are intermingled with
an enormous amount of sexual libido.[604] Therefore, it is not
astonishing that the scene of the stigmata is nothing but an incubation
through the Saviour, only slightly changed metaphorically, as compared
with the ancient conception of “unio mystica,” as cohabitation with the
god. Emmerich relates the following of her stigmatization:

  “I had a contemplation of the sufferings of Christ, and implored him
  to let me feel with him his sorrows, and prayed five paternosters to
  the honor of the five sacred wounds. Lying on my bed with outstretched
  arms, I entered into a great sweetness and into an endless thirst for
  the torments of Jesus. Then I saw a light descending upon me: it came
  obliquely from above. It was a crucified body, living and transparent,
  with arms extended, but without a cross. The wounds shone brighter
  than the body; they were five circles of glory, coming forth from the
  whole glory. I was enraptured and my heart was moved with great pain
  and yet with sweetness from longing to share in the torments of my
  Saviour. And my longings for the sorrows of the Redeemer increased
  more and more on gazing on his wounds, and passed from my breast,
  through my hands, sides and feet to his holy wounds: then from the
  hands, then from the sides, then from the feet of the figure threefold
  shining red beams ending below in an arrow, shot forth to my hands,
  sides and feet.”

The beams, in accordance with the phallic fundamental thought, are
threefold, terminating below in an arrow-point.[605] Like Cupid, the
sun, too, has its quiver, full of destroying or fertilizing arrows, sun
rays,[606] which possess phallic meaning. On this significance evidently
rests the Oriental custom of designating brave sons as arrows and
javelins of the parents. “To make sharp arrows” is an Arabian expression
for “to generate brave sons.” The Psalms declare (cxxvii:4):

  “Like as the arrows in the hands of the giant; even so are the young
  children.”

(Compare with this the remarks previously made about “boys.”) Because of
this significance of the arrow it is intelligible why the Scythian king
Ariantes, when he wished to prepare a census, demanded an arrow-head
from each man. A similar meaning attaches equally to the lance. Men are
descended from the lance, because the ash is the mother of lances.
Therefore, the men of the Iron Age are derived from her. The marriage
custom to which Ovid alludes (“Comat virgineas hasta recurva
comas”—_Fastorum_, lib. ii: 560) has already been mentioned. Kaineus
issued a command that his lance be honored. Pindar relates in the legend
of this Kaineus:

  “He descended into the depths, splitting the earth with a straight
  foot.”[607]

He is said to have originally been a maiden named Kainis, who, because
of her complaisance, was transformed into an invulnerable man by
Poseidon. Ovid pictures the battle of the Lapithæ with the invulnerable
Kaineus; how at last they covered him completely with trees, because
they could not otherwise touch him. Ovid says at this place:

           “Exitus in dubio est: alii sub inania corpus
           Tartara detrusum silvarum mole ferebant,
           Abnuit Ampycides: medioque ex aggere fulvis
           Vidit avem pennis liquidas exire sub auras.”[608]

Roscher considers this bird to be the golden plover (Charadrius
pluvialis), which borrows its name from the fact that it lives in the
χαράδρα, a crevice in the earth. By his song he proclaims the
approaching rain. Kaineus was changed into this bird.

We see again in this little myth the typical constituents of the libido
myth: original bisexuality, immortality (invulnerability) through
entrance into the mother (splitting the mother with the foot, and to
become covered up) and resurrection as a bird of the soul and a bringer
of fertility (ascending sun). When this type of hero causes his lance to
be worshipped, it probably means that his lance is a valid and
equivalent expression of himself.

From our present standpoint, we understand in a new sense that passage
in Job, which I mentioned in Chapter IV of the first part of this book:

  “He has set me up for his mark.

  “His archers compass me round about, he cleaveth my reins asunder, and
  doth not spare:—he poureth out my gall upon the ground.

  “He breaketh me with breach upon breach: he runneth upon me like a
  giant.”—_Job_ xvi:12–13–14.

Now we understand this symbolism as an expression for the soul torment
caused by the onslaught of the unconscious desires. The libido festers
in his flesh, a cruel god has taken possession of him and pierced him
with his painful libidian projectiles, with thoughts, which
overwhelmingly pass through him. (As a dementia præcox patient once said
to me during his recovery: “To-day a thought suddenly thrust itself
through me.”) This same idea is found again in Nietzsche in Zarathustra:

                           _The Magician_

           Stretched out, shivering
           Like one half dead whose feet are warmed,
           Shaken alas! by unknown fevers,
           Trembling from the icy pointed arrows of frost,
           Hunted by Thee, O Thought!
           Unutterable! Veiled! Horrible One!
           Thou huntsman behind the clouds!
           Struck to the ground by thee,
           Thou mocking eye that gazeth at me from the dark!
           —————— Thus do I lie
           Bending, writhing, tortured
           With all eternal tortures,
           Smitten
           By thee, crudest huntsman,
           Thou unfamiliar God.

           Smite deeper!
           Smite once more:
           Pierce through and rend my heart!
           What meaneth this torturing
           With blunt-toothed arrows?
           Why gazeth thou again,
           Never weary of human pain,
           With malicious, God-lightning eyes,
           Thou wilt not kill,
           But torture, torture?

No long-drawn-out explanation is necessary to enable us to recognize in
this comparison the old, universal idea of the martyred sacrifice of
God, which we have met previously in the Mexican sacrifice of the cross
and in the sacrifice of Odin.[609] This same conception faces us in the
oft-repeated martyrdom of St. Sebastian, where, in the delicate-glowing
flesh of the young god, all the pain of renunciation which has been felt
by the artist has been portrayed. An artist always embodies in his
artistic work a portion of the mysteries of his time. In a heightened
degree the same is true of the principal Christian symbol, the crucified
one pierced by the lance, the conception of the man of the Christian era
tormented by his wishes, crucified and dying in Christ.

This is not torment which comes from without, which befalls mankind; but
that he himself is the hunter, murderer, sacrificer and sacrificial
knife is shown us in another of Nietzsche’s poems, wherein the apparent
dualism is transformed into the soul conflict through the use of the
same symbolism:

                 “Oh, Zarathustra,
                 Most cruel Nimrod!
                 Whilom hunter of God
                 The snare of all virtue,
                 An arrow of evil!
                 Now
                 Hunted by thyself
                 Thine own prey
                 Pierced through thyself,
                 Now
                 Alone with thee
                 Twofold in thine own knowledge
                 Mid a hundred mirrors
                 False to thyself,
                 Mid a hundred memories
                 Uncertain
                 Ailing with each wound
                 Shivering with each frost
                 Caught in thine own snares,
                 Self knower!
                 Self hangman!

                 “Why didst thou strangle thyself
                 With the noose of thy wisdom?
                 Why hast thou enticed thyself
                 Into the Paradise of the old serpent?
                 Why hast thou crept
                 Into thyself, thyself?...”

The deadly arrows do not strike the hero from without, but it is he
himself who, in disharmony with himself, hunts, fights and tortures
himself. Within himself will has turned against will, libido against
libido—therefore, the poet says, “Pierced through thyself,” that is to
say, wounded by his own arrow. Because we have discerned that the arrow
is a libido symbol, the idea of “penetrating or piercing through”
consequently becomes clear to us. It is a phallic act of union with
one’s self, a sort of self-fertilization (introversion); also a
self-violation, a self-murder; therefore, Zarathustra may call himself
his own hangman, like Odin, who sacrifices himself to Odin.

The wounding by one’s own arrow means, first of all, _the state of
introversion_. What this signifies we already know—the libido sinks into
its “own depths” (a well-known comparison of Nietzsche’s) and finds
there below, in the shadows of the unconscious, the substitute for the
upper world, which it has abandoned: _the world of memories_ (“’mid a
hundred memories”), the strongest and most influential of which are the
early infantile memory pictures. It is the world of the child, this
paradise-like state of earliest childhood, from which we are separated
by a hard law. In this subterranean kingdom slumber sweet feelings of
home and the endless hopes of all that is to be. As Heinrich in the
“Sunken Bell,” by Gerhart Hauptmann, says, in speaking of his miraculous
work:

             “There is a song lost and forgotten,
             A song of home, a love song of childhood,
             Brought up from the depths of the fairy well,
             Known to all, but yet unheard.”

However, as Mephistopheles says, “The danger is great.” These depths are
enticing; they are the mother and—death. When the libido leaves the
bright upper world, whether from the decision of the individual or from
decreasing life force, then it sinks back into its own depths, into the
source from which it has gushed forth, and turns back to that point of
cleavage, the umbilicus, through which it once entered into this body.
This point of cleavage is called the mother, because from her comes the
source of the libido. Therefore, when some great work is to be
accomplished, before which weak man recoils, doubtful of his strength,
his libido returns to that source—and this is the dangerous moment, in
which the decision takes place between annihilation and new life. If the
libido remains arrested in the wonder kingdom of the inner world,[610]
then the man has become for the world above a phantom, then he is
practically dead or desperately ill.[611] But if the libido succeeds in
tearing itself loose and pushing up into the world above, then a miracle
appears. This journey to the underworld has been a fountain of youth,
and new fertility springs from his apparent death. This train of thought
is very beautifully gathered into a Hindoo myth: Once upon a time,
Vishnu sank into an ecstasy (introversion) and during this state of
sleep bore Brahma, who, enthroned upon the lotus flower, arose from the
navel of Vishnu, bringing with him the Vedas, which he diligently read.
(Birth of creative thought from introversion.) But through Vishnu’s
ecstasy a devouring flood came upon the world. (Devouring through
introversion, symbolizing the danger of entering into the mother of
death.) A demon taking advantage of the danger, stole the Vedas from
Brahma and hid them in the depths. (Devouring of the libido.) Brahma
roused Vishnu, and the latter, transforming himself into a fish, plunged
into the flood, fought with the demon (battle with the dragon),
conquered him and recaptured the Vedas. (Treasure obtained with
difficulty.)

Self-concentration and the strength derived therefrom correspond to this
primitive train of thought. It also explains numerous sacrificial and
magic rites which we have already fully discussed. Thus the impregnable
Troy falls because the besiegers creep into the belly of a wooden horse;
for he alone is a hero who is reborn from the mother, like the sun. But
the danger of this venture is shown by the history of Philoctetes, who
was the only one in the Trojan expedition who knew the hidden sanctuary
of Chryse, where the Argonauts had sacrificed already, and where the
Greeks planned to sacrifice in order to assure a safe ending to their
undertaking. Chryse was a nymph upon the island of Chryse; according to
the account of the scholiasts in Sophocles’s “Philoctetes,” this nymph
loved Philoctetes, and cursed him because he spurned her love. This
characteristic projection, which is also met with in the Gilgamesh epic,
should be referred back, as suggested, to the repressed incest wish of
the son, who is represented through the projection as if the mother had
the evil wish, for the refusal of which the son was given over to death.
In reality, however, the son becomes mortal by separating himself from
the mother. His fear of death, therefore, corresponds to the repressed
wish to turn back to the mother, and causes him to believe that the
mother threatens or pursues him. The teleological significance of this
_fear of persecution_ is evident; _it is to keep son and mother apart_.

The curse of Chryse is realized in so far that Philoctetes, according to
one version, when approaching his altar, injured himself in his foot
with one of his own deadly poisonous arrows, or, according to another
version[612] (this is better and far more abundantly proven), _was
bitten in his foot by a poisonous serpent_.[613] From then on he is
ailing.[614]

This very typical wound, which also destroyed Rê, is described in the
following manner in an Egyptian hymn:

          “The ancient of the Gods moved his mouth,
          He cast his saliva upon the earth,
          And what he spat, fell upon the ground.
          With her hands Isis kneaded that and the soil
          Which was about it, together:
          From that she created a venerable worm,
          And made him like a spear.
          She did not twist him living around her face,
          But threw him coiled upon the path,
          Upon which the great God wandered at ease
          Through all his lands.

          “The venerable God stepped forth radiantly,
          The gods who served Pharaoh accompanied him,
          And he proceeded as every day.
          Then the venerable worm stung him....
          The divine God opened his mouth
          And the voice of his majesty echoed even to the sky.
          And the gods exclaimed: Behold!
          Thereupon he could not answer,
          His jaws chattered,
          All his limbs trembled
          And the poison gripped his flesh,
          As the Nile seizes upon the land.”

In this hymn Egypt has again preserved for us a primitive conception of
the serpent’s sting. The aging of the autumn sun as an image of human
senility is symbolically traced back to the mother through the poisoning
by the serpent. The mother is reproached, because her malice causes the
death of the sun-god. The serpent, the primitive symbol of fear,[615]
illustrates the repressed tendency to turn back to the mother, because
the only possibility of security from death is possessed by the mother,
as the source of life.

Accordingly, only the mother can cure him, sick unto death, and,
therefore, the hymn goes on to depict how the gods were assembled to
take counsel:

      “And Isis came with her wisdom:
      Her mouth is full of the breath of life,
      Her words banish sorrow,
      And her speech animates those who no longer breathe.
      She said: ‘What is that; what is that, divine father?
      Behold, a worm has brought you sorrow——’

      “‘Tell me thy name, divine father,
      Because the man remains alive, who is called by his name.’”

Whereupon Rê replied:

    “‘I am he, who created heaven and earth, and piled up the hills,
    And created all beings thereon.
    I am he, who made the water and caused the great flood,
    Who produced the bull of his mother,
    Who is the procreator,’ etc.

    “The poison did not depart, it went further,
    The great God was not cured.
    Then said Isis to Rê:
    ‘Thine is not the name thou hast told me.
    Tell me true that the poison may leave thee,
    For he whose name is spoken will live.’”

Finally Rê decides to speak his true name. He is approximately healed
(imperfect composition of Osiris); but he has lost his power, and
finally he retreats to the heavenly cow.

The poisonous worm is, if one may speak in this way, a “negative”
phallus, a deadly, not an animating, form of libido; therefore, a wish
for death, instead of a wish for life. The “true name” is soul and magic
power; hence a symbol of libido. What Isis demands is the retransference
of the libido to the mother goddess. This request is fulfilled
literally, for the aged god turns back to the divine cow, the symbol of
the mother.[616] This symbolism is clear from our previous explanations.
The onward urging, living libido which rules the consciousness of the
son, demands separation from the mother. The longing of the child for
the mother is a hindrance on the path to this, taking the form of a
psychologic resistance, which is expressed empirically in the neurosis
by all manners of fears, that is to say, the fear of life. The more a
person withdraws from adaptation to reality, and falls into slothful
inactivity, the greater becomes his anxiety (cum grano salis), which
everywhere besets him at each point as a hindrance upon his path. The
fear springs from the mother, that is to say, from the longing to go
back to the mother, which is opposed to the adaptation to reality. This
is the way in which the mother has become apparently the malicious
pursuer. Naturally, it is not the actual mother, although the actual
mother, with the abnormal tenderness with which she sometimes pursues
her child, even into adult years, may gravely injure it through a
willful prolonging of the infantile state in the child. It is rather the
mother-imago, which becomes the Lamia. The mother-imago, however,
possesses its power solely and exclusively from the son’s tendency not
only to look and to work forwards, but also to glance backwards to the
pampering sweetness of childhood, to that glorious state of
irresponsibility and security with which the protecting mother-care once
surrounded him.[617]

The retrospective longing acts like a paralyzing poison upon the energy
and enterprise; so that it may well be compared to a poisonous serpent
which lies across our path. Apparently, it is a hostile demon which robs
us of energy, but, in reality, it is the individual unconscious, the
retrogressive tendency of which begins to overcome the conscious forward
striving. The cause of this can be, for example, the natural aging which
weakens the energy, or it may be great external difficulties, which
cause man to break down and become a child again, or it may be, and this
is probably the most frequent cause, the woman who enslaves the man, so
that he can no longer free himself, and becomes a child again.[618] It
may be of significance also that Isis, as sister-wife of the sun-god,
creates the poisonous animal from the spittle of the god, which is
perhaps a substitute for sperma, and, therefore, is a symbol of libido.
She creates the animal from the libido of the god; that means she
receives his power, making him weak and dependent, so that by this means
she assumes the dominating rôle of the mother. (Mother transference to
the wife.) This part is preserved in the legend of Samson, in the rôle
of Delilah, who cut off Samson’s hair, the sun’s rays, thus robbing him
of his strength.[619] Any weakening of the adult man strengthens the
wishes of the unconscious; therefore, the decrease of strength appears
directly as the backward striving towards the mother.

There is still to be considered one more source of the reanimation of
the mother-imago. We have already met it in the discussion of the mother
scene in “Faust,” that is to say, _the willed introversion of a creative
mind_, which, retreating before its own problem and inwardly collecting
its forces, dips at least for a moment into the source of life, in order
there to wrest a little more strength from the mother for the completion
of its work. It is a mother-child play with one’s self, in which lies
much weak selfadmiration and self-adulation (“Among a hundred
mirrors”—Nietzsche); _a Narcissus state_, a strange spectacle, perhaps,
for profane eyes. The separation from the mother-imago, the birth out of
one’s self, reconciles all conflicts through the sufferings. This is
probably meant by Nietzsche’s verse:

                 “Why hast thou enticed thyself
                 Into the Paradise of the old serpent?
                 Why hast thou crept
                 Into thyself, thyself?...

                 “A sick man now
                 Sick of a serpent’s poison,[620]
                 A captive now
                 Whom the hardest destiny befell
                 In thine own pit;
                 Bowed down as thou workest
                 Encaved within thyself,
                 Burrowing into thyself,
                 Helpless,
                 Stiff,
                 A corpse.
                 Overwhelmed with a hundred burdens,
                 Overburdened by thyself.
                 A wise man,
                 A self-knower,
                 The wise Zarathustra;
                 Thou soughtest the heaviest burden
                 And foundest thou thyself....”

The symbolism of this speech is of the greatest richness. He is buried
in the depths of _self, as if in the earth_; really a dead man who has
turned back to mother earth;[621] a Kaineus “piled with a hundred
burdens” and pressed down to death; the one who groaning bears the heavy
burden of his own libido, of that libido which draws him back to the
mother. Who does not think of the Taurophoria of Mithra, who took his
bull (according to the Egyptian hymn, “the bull of his mother”), that
is, his love for his mother, the heaviest burden upon his back, and with
that entered upon the painful course of the so-called Transitus![622]
This path of passion led to the cave, in which the bull was sacrificed.
Christ, too, had to bear the cross,[623] the symbol of his love for the
mother, and he carried it to the place of sacrifice where the lamb was
slain in the form of the God, the infantile man, a “self-executioner,”
and then to burial in the subterranean sepulchre.[624]

That which in Nietzsche appears as a poetical figure of speech is really
a primitive myth. It is as if the poet still possessed a dim idea or
capacity to feel and reactivate those imperishable phantoms of long-past
worlds of thought in the words of our present-day speech and in the
images which crowd themselves into his phantasy. Hauptmann also says:
“Poetic rendering is that which allows the echo of the primitive word to
resound through the form.”[625]


The sacrifice, with its mysterious and manifold meaning, which is rather
hinted at than expressed, passes unrecognized in the unconscious of our
author. The arrow is not shot, the hero Chiwantopel is not yet fatally
poisoned and ready for death through self-sacrifice. We now can say,
according to the preceding material, this sacrifice means renouncing the
mother, that is to say, _renunciation of all bonds and limitations which
the soul has taken with it from the period of childhood into the adult
life_. From various hints of Miss Miller’s it appears that at the time
of these phantasies she was still living in the circle of the family,
evidently at an age which was in urgent need of independence. That is to
say, man does not live very long in the infantile environment or in the
bosom of his family without real danger to his mental health. Life calls
him forth to independence, and he who gives no heed to this hard call
because of childish indolence and fear is threatened by a neurosis, and
once the neurosis has broken out it becomes more and more a valid reason
to escape the battle with life and to remain for all time in the morally
poisoned infantile atmosphere.

The phantasy of the arrow-wound belongs in this struggle for personal
independence. The thought of this resolution has not yet penetrated the
dreamer. On the contrary, she rather repudiates it. After all the
preceding, it is evident that the symbolism of the arrow-wound through
direct translation must be taken as a coitus symbol. The “Occide
moriturus” attains by this means the sexual significance belonging to
it. Chiwantopel naturally represents the dreamer. But nothing is
attained and nothing is understood through one’s reduction to the coarse
sexual, because it is a commonplace that the unconscious shelters coitus
wishes, the discovery of which signifies nothing further. _The coitus
wish under this aspect is really a symbol for the individual
demonstration of the libido separated from the parents, of the conquest
of an independent life._ This step towards a new life means, at the same
time, the death of the past life.[626] Therefore, Chiwantopel is the
infantile hero[627] (the son, the child, the lamb, the fish) who is
still enchained by the fetters of childhood and who has to die as a
symbol of the incestuous libido, and with that sever the retrogressive
bond. For the entire libido is demanded for the battle of life, and
there can be no remaining behind. The dreamer cannot yet come to this
decision, which will tear aside all the sentimental connections with
father and mother, and yet it must be made in order to follow the call
of the individual destiny.




                              CHAPTER VII
                          THE DUAL MOTHER RÔLE


After the disappearance of the assailant, Chiwantopel begins the
following monologue:

  “From the extreme ends of these continents, from the farthest
  lowlands, after having forsaken the palace of my father, I have been
  wandering aimlessly during a hundred moons, always pursued by my mad
  desire to find ‘her who will understand.’ With jewels I have tempted
  many fair ones, with kisses I have tried to snatch the secret of their
  hearts, with acts of bravery I have conquered their admiration. (He
  reviews the women he has known.) Chita, the princess of my race ...
  she is a little fool, vain as a peacock, having nought in her head but
  jewels and perfume. Ta-nan, the young peasant, ... bah, a mere sow, no
  more than a breast and a stomach, caring only for pleasure. And then
  Ki-ma, the priestess, a true parrot, repeating hollow phrases learnt
  from the priests; all for show, without real education or sincerity,
  suspicious poseur and hypocrite!... Alas! Not one who understands me,
  not one who resembles me, not one who has a soul sister to mine. There
  is not one among them all who has known my soul, not one who could
  read my thought; far from it; not one capable of seeking with me the
  luminous summits, or of spelling with me the superhuman word, love.”

Here Chiwantopel himself says that his journeying and wandering is a
quest for that other, and for the meaning of life which lies in union
with her. In the first part of this work we merely hinted gently at this
possibility. The fact that the seeker is masculine and the sought-for of
feminine sex is not so astonishing, because the chief object of the
unconscious transference is the mother, as has probably been seen from
that which we have already learned. The daughter takes a male attitude
towards the mother. The genesis of this adjustment can only be suspected
in our case, because objective proof is lacking. Therefore, let us
rather be satisfied with inferences. “She who will understand” means the
mother, in the infantile language. At the same time, it also means the
life companion. As is well known, the sex contrast concerns the libido
but little. The sex of the object plays a surprisingly slight rôle in
the estimation of the unconscious. The object itself, taken as an
objective reality, is but of slight significance. (But it is of greatest
importance whether the libido is transferred or introverted.) The
original concrete meaning of _erfassen_, “to seize,” _begreifen_, “to
touch,” etc., allows us to recognize clearly the under side of the
wish—to find a congenial person. But the “upper” intellectual half is
also contained in it, and is to be taken into account at the same time.
One might be inclined to assume this tendency if it were not that our
culture abused the same, for the misunderstood woman has become almost
proverbial, which can only be the result of a wholly distorted
valuation. On the one side, our culture undervalues most extraordinarily
the importance of sexuality; on the other side, sexuality breaks out as
a direct result of the repression burdening it at every place where it
does not belong, and makes use of such an indirect manner of expression
that one may expect to meet it suddenly almost anywhere. Thus the idea
of the intimate comprehension of a human soul, which is in reality
something very beautiful and pure, is soiled and disagreeably distorted
through the entrance of the indirect sexual meaning.[628] The secondary
meaning or, better expressed, the misuse, which repressed and denied
sexuality forces upon the highest soul functions, makes it possible, for
example, for certain of our opponents to scent in psychoanalysis
prurient erotic confessionals. These are subjective wish-fulfilment
deliria which need no contra arguments. This misuse makes the wish to be
“understood” highly suspicious, if the natural demands of life have not
been fulfilled. Nature has _first claim_ on man; only long afterwards
does the luxury of intellect come. The mediæval ideal of life for the
sake of death needs gradually to be replaced by a natural conception of
life, in which the normal demands of men are thoroughly kept in mind, so
that the desires of the animal sphere may no longer be compelled to drag
down into their service the high gifts of the intellectual sphere in
order to find an outlet. We are inclined, therefore, to consider the
dreamer’s wish for understanding, first of all, as a repressed striving
towards the natural destiny. This meaning coincides absolutely with
psychoanalytic experience, that there are countless neurotic people who
apparently are prevented from experiencing life because they have an
unconscious and often also a conscious repugnance to the sexual fate,
under which they imagine all kinds of ugly things. There is only too
great an inclination to yield to this pressure of the unconscious
sexuality and to experience the dreaded (unconsciously hoped for)
disagreeable sexual experience, so as to acquire by that means a
legitimately founded horror which retains them more surely in the
infantile situation. This is the reason why so many people fall into
that very state towards which they have the greatest abhorrence.

That we were correct in our assumption that, in Miss Miller, it is a
question of the battle for independence is shown by her statement that
the hero’s departure from his father’s house reminds her of the fate of
the young Buddha, who likewise renounced all luxury to which he was born
in order to go out into the world to live out his destiny to its
completion. Buddha gave the same heroic example as did Christ, who
separated from his mother, and even spoke bitter words (Matthew, chap.
x. v. 34):

  “Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send
  peace, but a sword.

  (35) “For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and
  the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her
  mother-in-law.

  (36) “And a man’s foes shall be they of his own household.

  (37) “He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of
  me.”

Or _Luke_, chap. xii, v. 51:

  “Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay:
  but rather division.

  (52) “For from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided,
  three against two, and two against three.

  (53) “The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against
  the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against
  the mother; the mother-in-law against the daughter-in-law, and the
  daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.”

Horus snatched from his mother her head adornment, the power. Just as
Adam struggled with Lilith, so he struggles for power. Nietzsche, in
“Human, All Too Human,” expressed the same in very beautiful words:

  “One may suppose that a mind, in which the ‘type of free mind’ is to
  ripen and sweeten at maturity, has had its decisive crisis in a great
  detachment, so that before this time it was just so much the more a
  fettered spirit and appeared chained forever to its corner and its
  pillar.[629] What binds it most firmly? What cords are almost
  untearable? Among human beings of a high and exquisite type, it would
  be duties: that reverence, which is suitable for youth, that modesty
  and tenderness for all the old honored and valued things, that
  thankfulness for the earth from which they grew, for the hand which
  guided them, for the shrine where they learnt to pray:—their loftiest
  moments themselves come to bind them the firmest, to obligate them the
  most permanently. The great detachment comes suddenly for people so
  bound.

  “‘Better to die than to live here,’—thus rings the imperative voice of
  seduction: and this here, this ‘at home’ is all, that it (the soul)
  has loved until now! A sudden terror and suspicion against that which
  it has loved, a lightning flash of scorn towards that which is called
  ‘duty,’ a rebellious, arbitrary, volcanic, impelling desire for
  travelling, for strange countries, estrangements, coolness, frigidity,
  disillusionments, a hatred of love, perhaps a sacrilegious touch and
  glance backwards[630] there where just now it adored and loved,
  perhaps a blush of shame over what it has just done, and at the same
  time an exultation over having done it, an intoxicating internal
  joyous thrill, in which a victory reveals itself—a victory? Over what?
  Over whom? An enigmatic, doubtful, questioning victory, but the first
  triumph. Of such woe and pain is formed the history of the great
  detachment. It is like a disease which can destroy men,—this first
  eruption of strength and will towards self-assertion.”[631]

The danger lies, as is brilliantly expressed by Nietzsche, in isolation
in one’s self:

  “Solitude surrounds and embraces him ever more threatening, ever more
  constricting, ever more heart-strangling, the terrible Goddess and
  Mater sæva cupidinum.”

The libido taken away from the mother, who is abandoned only
reluctantly, becomes threatening as a serpent, the symbol of death, for
the relation to the mother must cease, _must die, which itself almost
causes man’s death_. In “Mater sæva cupidinum” the idea attains rare,
almost conscious, perfection.

I do not presume to try to paint in better words than has Nietzsche the
psychology of the wrench from childhood.


Miss Miller furnishes us with a further reference to a material which
has influenced her creation in a more general manner; this is the great
Indian epic of Longfellow, “The Song of Hiawatha.”

If my readers have had patience to read thus far, and to reflect upon
what they have read, they frequently must have wondered at the number of
times I introduce for comparison such apparently foreign material and
how often I widen the base upon which Miss Miller’s creations rest.
Doubts must often have arisen whether it is justifiable to enter into
important discussions concerning the psychologic foundations of myths,
religions and culture in general on the basis of such scanty
suggestions. It might be said that behind the Miller phantasies such a
thing is scarcely to be found. I need hardly emphasize the fact that I,
too, have sometimes been in doubt. I had never read “Hiawatha” until, in
the course of my work, I came to this part. “Hiawatha,” a poetical
compilation of Indian myths, gives me, however, a justification for all
preceding reflections, because this epic contains an unusual number of
mythologic problems. This fact is probably of great importance for the
wealth of suggestions in the Miller phantasies. We are, therefore,
compelled to obtain an insight into this epic.

Nawadaha sings the songs of the epic of the hero Hiawatha, the friend of
man:

                 “There he sang of Hiawatha,
                 Sang the songs of Hiawatha,
                 Sang his wondrous birth and being,
                 How he prayed and how he fasted,
                 How he lived and toiled and suffered,
                 That the tribes of men might prosper,
                 That he might advance his people.”

The teleological meaning of the hero, as that symbolic figure which
unites in itself libido in the form of admiration and adoration, in
order to lead to higher sublimations by way of the symbolic bridges of
the myths, is anticipated here. Thus we become quickly acquainted with
Hiawatha as a savior, and are prepared to hear all that which must be
said of a savior, of his marvellous birth, of his early great deeds, and
his sacrifice for his fellow-men.

The first song begins with a fragment of evangelism: Gitche Manito, the
“master of life,” tired of the quarrels of his human children, calls his
people together and makes known to them the joyous message:

                “I will send a prophet to you,
                A Deliverer of the nations,
                Who shall guide you and shall teach you,
                Who shall toil and suffer with you.
                If you listen to his counsels,
                You will multiply and prosper.
                If his warnings pass unheeded,
                You will fade away and perish!”

Gitche Manito, the Mighty, “the creator of the nations,” is represented
as he stood erect “on the great Red Pipestone quarry.”

                  “From his footprints flowed a river,
                  Leaped into the light of morning,
                  O’er the precipice plunging downward
                  Gleamed like Ishkoodah, the comet.”

The water flowing from his footsteps sufficiently proves the phallic
nature of this creator. I refer to the earlier utterances concerning the
phallic and fertilizing nature of the horse’s foot and the horse’s
steps, and especially do I recall Hippocrene and the foot of
Pegasus.[632] We meet with the same idea in Psalm lxv, vv. 9 to 11:

  “Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it; thou makest it very
  plenteous.

  “The river of God is full of water; thou preparest their corn, for so
  thou providest for the earth.

  “Thou waterest her furrows: thou sendest rain into the little valleys
  thereof; thou makest it soft with the drops of rain, and blessest the
  increase of it.

  “Thou crownest the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop
  fatness.”

Wherever the fertilizing God steps, there is fruitfulness. We already
have spoken of the symbolic meaning of treading in discussing the
nightmares. Kaineus passes into the depths, “splitting the earth with a
foot outstretched.” Amphiaraus, another chthonic hero, sinks into the
earth, which Zeus has opened for him by a stroke of lightning. (Compare
with that the above-mentioned vision of a hysterical patient, who saw a
black horse after a flash of lightning: identity of horse’s footstep and
flash of lightning.) By means of a flash of lightning heroes were made
immortal.[633] Faust attained the mothers when he stamped his foot.

  “Stamp and descend, stamping thou’lt rise again.”

The heroes in the sun-devouring myths often stamp at or struggle in the
jaws of the monster. Thus Tor stamped through the ship’s bottom in
battle with the monster, and _went as far as the bottom of the sea_.
(Kaineus.) (Concerning “kicking” as an infantile phantasy, see above.)
The regression of the libido to the presexual stage makes this
preparatory action of treading either a substitution for the coitus
phantasy or for the phantasy of re-entrance into the mother’s womb. The
comparison of water flowing from the footsteps with a comet is a light
symbolism for the fructifying moisture (sperma). According to an
observation by Humboldt (Kosmos), certain South American Indian tribes
call the meteors “urine of the stars.” Mention is also made of how
Gitche Manito makes fire. He blows upon a forest, so that the trees,
rubbing upon each other, burst into flame. This demon is, therefore, an
excellent libido symbol; he also produced fire.

After this prologue in the second song, the hero’s previous history is
related. The great warrior, Mudjekeewis (Hiawatha’s father), has
cunningly overcome the great bear, “the terror of the nations,” and
stolen from him the magic “belt of wampum,” a girdle of shells. Here we
meet the motive of the “treasure attained with difficulty,” which the
hero rescues from the monster. Who the bear is, is shown by the poet’s
comparisons. Mudjekeewis strikes the bear on his head after he has
robbed him of the treasure.

                 “With the heavy blow bewildered
                 Rose the great Bear of the mountains,
                 But his knees beneath him trembled,
                 And he whimpered _like a woman_.”

Mudjekeewis said derisively to him:

                 “Else you would not cry, and whimper,
                 Like a _miserable woman_!

                        ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

                 But you, Bear! sit here and whimper,
                 And disgrace your tribe by crying,
                 Like a wretched Shaugodaya,
                 Like a _cowardly old woman_!”

These three comparisons with a woman are to be found near each other on
the same page. Mudjekeewis has, like a true hero, once more torn life
from the jaws of death, from the all-devouring “terrible mother.” This
deed, which, as we have seen, is also represented as a journey to hell,
“night journey through the sea,” the conquering of the monster from
within, signifies at the same time entrance into the mother’s womb, a
rebirth, the results of which are perceptible also for Mudjekeewis. As
in the Zosimos vision, here too the entering one becomes the breath of
the wind or spirit. Mudjekeewis becomes the west wind, the fertilizing
breath, the father of winds.[634] His sons become the other winds. An
intermezzo tells of them and of their love stories, of which I will
mention only the courtship of Wabuns, the East Wind, because here the
erotic wooing of the wind is pictured in an especially beautiful manner.
Every morning he sees a beautiful girl in a meadow, whom he eagerly
courts:

                 “Every morning, gazing earthward,
                 Still the first thing he beheld there
                 Was her blue eyes looking at him,
                 Two blue lakes among the rushes.”

The comparison with water is not a matter of secondary importance,
because “from wind and water” shall man be born anew.

                “And he wooed her with caresses,
                Wooed her with his smile of sunshine,
                With his flattering words he wooed her,
                With his sighing and his singing,
                Gentlest whispers in the branches,
                Softest music, sweetest odors,” etc.

In these onomatopoetic verses the wind’s caressing courtship is
excellently expressed.[635]

The third song presents the previous history of Hiawatha’s mother. His
grandmother, when a maiden, lived in the moon. There she once swung upon
a liana, but a jealous lover cut off the liana, and Nokomis, Hiawatha’s
grandmother, fell to earth. The people, who saw her fall downwards,
thought that she was a _shooting star_. This marvellous descent of
Nokomis is more plainly illustrated by a later passage of this same
song; there little Hiawatha asks the grandmother what is the moon.
Nokomis teaches him about it as follows: The moon is the body of a
_grandmother_, whom a warlike grandson has cast up there in wrath. Hence
the moon is the _grandmother_. In ancient beliefs, the moon is also the
gathering place of departed souls,[636] the guardian of seeds;
therefore, once more a place of the origin of life of predominantly
feminine significance. The remarkable thing is that Nokomis, falling
upon the earth, gave birth to a daughter, Wenonah, subsequently the
mother of Hiawatha. The throwing upwards of the mother, and her falling
down and bringing forth, seems to contain something typical in itself.
Thus a story of the seventeenth century relates that a mad bull threw a
pregnant woman as high as a house, and tore open her womb, and the child
fell without harm upon the earth. On account of his wonderful birth,
this child was considered a hero or doer of miracles, but he died at an
early age. The belief is widespread among lower savages that the sun is
feminine and the moon masculine. Among the Namaqua, a Hottentot tribe,
the opinion is prevalent that the sun consists of transparent bacon.

  “The people, who journey on boats, draw it down by magic every
  evening, cut off a suitable piece and then give it _a kick so that it
  flies up again into the sky_.”—_Waitz_: “Anthropologie,” II, 342.

The infantile nourishment comes from the mother. In the Gnostic
phantasies we come across a legend of the origin of man which possibly
belongs here: the female archons bound to the vault of Heaven are
unable, on account of its quick rotation, to keep their young within
them, but let them fall upon the earth, from which men arise. Possibly
there is here a connection with barbaric midwifery, the letting fall of
the parturient. The assault upon the mother is already introduced with
the adventure of Mudjekeewis, and is continued in the violent handling
of the “grandmother,” Nokomis, who, as a result of the cutting of the
liana and the fall downwards, seems in some way to have become pregnant.
The “cutting of the branch,” the plucking, we have already recognized as
mother incest. (See above.) That well-known verse, “Saxonland, where
beautiful maidens grow upon trees,” and phrases like “picking cherries
in a neighbor’s garden,” allude to a similar idea. The fall downwards of
Nokomis deserves to be compared to a poetical figure in Heine.

                    “A star, a star is falling
                      Out of the glittering sky!
                    The star of Love! I watch it
                      Sink in the depths and die.

                    “The leaves and buds are falling
                      From many an apple-tree;
                    I watch the mirthful breezes
                      Embrace them wantonly...”

Wenonah later was courted by the caressing West Wind, and becomes
pregnant. Wenonah, as a young moon-goddess, has the beauty of the
moonlight. Nokomis warns her of the dangerous courtship of Mudjekeewis,
the West Wind. But Wenonah allows herself to become infatuated, and
conceives from the breath of the wind, from the πνεῦμα, a son, our hero.

                 “And the West-Wind came at evening,

                        ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

                 Found the beautiful Wenonah,
                 Lying there amid the lilies,
                 Wooed her with his words of sweetness,
                 Wooed her with his soft caresses,
                 Till she bore a son in sorrow,
                 Bore a son of love and sorrow.”

Fertilization through the breath of the spirit is already a well-known
precedent for us. The star or comet plainly belongs to the birth scene
as a libido symbol; Nokomis, too, comes to earth as a shooting star.
Mörike’s sweet poetic phantasy has devised a similar divine origin.

               “And she who bore me in her womb,
                 And gave me food and clothing.
               She was a maid—a wild, brown maid,
                 Who looked on men with loathing.

               “She fleered at them and laughed out loud,
                 And bade no suitor tarry;
               ‘I’d rather be the Wind’s own bride
                 Than have a man and marry.’

               “Then came the Wind and held her fast
                 His captive, love-enchanted;
               And lo, by him a merry child
                 Within her womb was planted.”

Buddha’s marvellous birth story, retold by Sir Edwin Arnold, also shows
traces of this.[637]

       “Maya, the Queen ...
       Dreamed a strange dream, dreamed that a star from heaven—
       Splendid, six-rayed, in color rosy-pearl,
       Whereof the token was an Elephant
       Six-tusked and white as milk of Kamadhuk—
       Shot through the void; and shining into her,
       Entered her womb upon the right.”[638]

During Maya’s conception a wind blows over the land:

                                      “A wind blew
              With unknown freshness over lands and seas.”

After the birth the four genii of the East, West, South and North come
to render service as bearers of the palanquin. (The coming of the wise
men at Christ’s birth.) We also find here a distinct reference to the
“four winds.” For the completion of the symbolism there is to be found
in the Buddha myth, as well as in the birth legend of Christ, besides
the impregnation by star and wind, also the fertilization by an animal,
here an elephant, which with its phallic trunk fulfilled in Maya the
Christian method of fructification through the ear or the head. It is
well known that, in addition to the dove, the unicorn is also a
procreative symbol of the Logos.

Here arises the question why the birth of a hero always had to take
place under such strange symbolic circumstances? It might also be
imagined that a hero arose from ordinary surroundings and gradually grew
out of his inferior environment, perhaps with a thousand troubles and
dangers. (And, indeed, this motive is by no means strange in the hero
myth.) It might be said that superstition demands strange conditions of
birth and generation; but why does it demand them?

The answer to this question is: that the birth of the hero, as a rule,
is not that of an ordinary mortal, but is a rebirth from the
mother-spouse; hence it occurs under mysterious ceremonies. Therefore,
in the very beginning, lies the motive of the two mothers of the hero.
As Rank[639] has shown us through many examples, the hero is often
obliged to experience exposure, and upbringing by foster parents, and in
this manner he acquires the two mothers. A striking example is the
relation of Hercules to Hera. In the Hiawatha epic Wenonah dies after
the birth and Nokomis takes her place. Maya dies after the birth[640]
and Buddha is given a stepmother. The stepmother is sometimes an animal
(the she-wolf of Romulus and Remus, etc.). The twofold mother may be
replaced by the motive of twofold birth, which has attained a lofty
significance in the Christian mythology; namely, through baptism, which,
as we have seen, represents rebirth. Thus man is born not merely in a
commonplace manner, but also born again in a mysterious manner, by means
of which he becomes a participator of the kingdom of God, of
immortality. Any one may become a hero in this way who is generated anew
through his own mother, because only through her does he share in
immortality. Therefore, it happened that the death of Christ on the
cross, which creates universal salvation, was understood as “baptism”;
that is to say, as rebirth through the second mother, the mysterious
tree of death. Christ says:

  “But I have a baptism to be baptized with: and how am I straitened
  till it be accomplished!”—_Luke_ xii: 50.

He interprets his death agony symbolically as birth agony.

The motive of the two mothers suggests the thought of self-rejuvenation,
and evidently expresses the fulfilment of the wish that it _might be
possible for the mother to bear me again_; at the same time, applied to
the heroes, it means one is a hero who is borne again by her who has
previously been his mother; that is to say, _a hero is he who may again
produce himself through his mother_.

The countless suggestions in the history of the procreation of the
heroes indicate the latter formulations. Hiawatha’s father first
overpowered the mother under the symbol of the bear; then himself
becoming a god, he procreates the hero. What Hiawatha had to do as hero,
Nokomis hinted to him in the legend of the origin of the moon; he is
forcibly to throw his mother upwards (or throw downwards?); then she
would become pregnant by this act of violence and could bring forth a
daughter. This rejuvenated mother would be allotted, according to the
Egyptian rite, as a daughter-wife to the sun-god, the father of his
mother, for self-reproduction. What action Hiawatha takes in this regard
we shall see presently. We have already studied the behavior of the
pre-Asiatic gods related to Christ. Concerning the pre-existence of
Christ, the Gospel of St. John is full of this thought. Thus the speech
of John the Baptist:

  “This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred
  before me; for he was before me.”—_John_ i: 30.

Also the beginning of the gospel is full of deep mythologic
significance:

  “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
  Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God.

  (3) “All things were made by him, and without him was not anything
  made that was made.

  (4) “In him was life, and the _life_ was the _light of men_.

  (5) “And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehendeth
  it not.

  (6) “There was a man sent from God whose name was John.

  (7) “The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light.

  (8) “He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that
  Light.

  (9) “That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh
  into the world.”

This is the proclamation of the reappearing light, the reborn sun, which
formerly was, and which will be again. In the baptistry at Pisa, Christ
is represented bringing the tree of life to man; his head is surrounded
by a sun halo. Over this relief stand the words INTROITUS SOLIS.

Because the one born was his own procreator, the history of his
procreation is strangely concealed under symbolic events, which are
meant to conceal and deny it; hence the extraordinary assertion of the
virgin conception. This is meant to hide the incestuous impregnation.
But do not let us forget that this naïve assertion plays an unusually
important part in the ingenious symbolic bridge, which is to guide the
libido out from the incestuous bond to higher and more useful
applications, which indicate a new kind of immortality; that is to say,
immortal work.

The environment of Hiawatha’s youth is of importance:

                 “By the shores of Gitche Gumee,
                 By the shining Big-Sea-Water,
                 Stood the wigwam of Nokomis,
                 Daughter of the Moon, Nokomis.
                 Dark behind it rose the forest,
                 Rose the black and gloomy pine-trees,
                 Rose the firs with cones upon them.
                 Bright before it beat the water,
                 Beat the clear and sunny water,
                 Beat the shining Big-Sea-Water.”

In this environment Nokomis brought him up. Here she taught him the
first words, and told him the first fairy tales, and the sounds of the
water and the wood were intermingled, so that the child learned not only
to understand man’s speech, but also that of Nature:

                “At the door on summer evenings
                Sat the little Hiawatha;
                Heard the whispering of the pine-trees,
                Heard the lapping of the water,
                Sounds of music, words of wonder:
                ‘Minne-wawa!’[641] said the pine-trees,
                ‘Mudway-aushka!’[642] said the water.”

Hiawatha hears human speech in the sounds of Nature; thus he understands
Nature’s speech. The wind says, “Wawa.” The cry of the wild goose is
“Wawa.” Wah-wah-taysee means the small glowworm which enchants him. Thus
the poet paints most beautifully the gradual gathering of external
nature into the compass of the subjective,[643] and the intimate
connection of the primary object to which the first lisping words were
applied, and from which the first sounds were derived, with the
secondary object, the wider nature which usurps imperceptibly the
mother’s place, and takes possession of those sounds heard first from
the mother, and also of those feelings which we all discover later in
ourselves in all the warm love of Mother Nature. The later blending,
whether pantheistic-philosophic or æsthetic, of the sentimental,
cultured man with nature is, looked at retrospectively, a reblending
with the mother, who was our primary object, and with whom we truly were
once wholly one.[644] Therefore, it is not astonishing when we again see
emerging in the poetical speech of a modern philosopher, Karl Joël, the
old pictures which symbolize the unity with the mother, illustrated by
the confluence of subject and object. In his recent book, “Seele und
Welt” (1912), Joël writes as follows, in the chapter called “Primal
Experience”[645]:

  “I lay on the seashore, the shining waters glittering in my dreamy
  eyes; at a great distance fluttered the soft breeze; throbbing,
  shimmering, stirring, lulling to sleep comes the wave beat to the
  shore—or to the ear? I know not. Distance and nearness become blurred
  into one; without and within glide into each other. Nearer and nearer,
  _dearer and more homelike sounds the beating of the waves_; now, like
  a thundering pulse in my head it strikes, and now it beats over my
  soul, devours it, embraces it, while it itself at the same time floats
  out like the blue waste of waters. Yes, without and within are one.
  Glistening and foaming, flowing and fanning and roaring, the entire
  symphony of the stimuli experienced sounds in one tone, all thought
  becomes one thought, which becomes one with feeling; the world exhales
  in the soul and the soul dissolves in the world. Our small life is
  encircled by a great sleep—_the sleep of our cradle, the sleep of our
  grave, the sleep of our home, from which we go forth in the morning,
  to which we again return in the evening_; our life but the short
  journey, the interval between the emergence from the original oneness
  and the sinking back into it! Blue shimmers the infinite sea, wherein
  dreams the jelly fish of the primitive life, toward which without
  ceasing our thoughts hark back dimly through eons of existence. For
  every happening entails a change and a guarantee of the unity of life.
  At that moment when they are no longer blended together, in that
  instant man lifts his _head, blind and dripping, from the depths_ of
  the stream of experience, from the oneness with the experience; at
  that moment of parting when the unity of life in startled surprise
  detaches the Change and holds it away from itself as something alien,
  at this moment of alienation the aspects of the experience have been
  substantialized into subject and object, and in that moment
  consciousness is born.”

Joël paints here, in unmistakable symbolism, the confluence of subject
and object as the reunion of mother and child. The symbols agree with
those of mythology, even in their details. The encircling and devouring
motive is distinctly suggested. The sea, devouring the sun and giving
birth to it anew, is already an old acquaintance. The moment of the rise
of consciousness, the separation of subject and object is a birth; truly
philosophical thought hangs with lame wings upon the few great primitive
pictures of human speech, above the simple, all-surpassing greatness of
which no thought can rise. The idea of the jelly fish is not
“accidental.” Once when I was explaining to a patient the maternal
significance of water at this contact with the mother complex, she
experienced a very unpleasant feeling. “It makes me squirm,” she said,
“as if I touched a jelly fish.” Here, too, the same idea! The blessed
state of sleep before birth and after death is, as Joël observed,
something like old shadowy memories of that unsuspecting, thoughtless
state of early childhood, where as yet no opposition disturbed the
peaceful flow of dawning life, to which the inner longing always draws
us back again and again, and from which the active life must free itself
anew with struggle and death, so that it may not be doomed to
destruction. Long before Joël, an Indian chieftain had said the same
thing in similar words to one of the restless wise men:

  “Ah, my brother, you will never learn to know the happiness of
  thinking nothing and doing nothing: this is next to sleep; this is the
  most delightful thing there is. Thus we were before birth, thus we
  shall be after death.”[646]

We shall see in Hiawatha’s later fate how important his early
impressions are in his choice of a wife. Hiawatha’s first deed was to
kill a roebuck with his arrow:

                   “Dead he lay there in the forest,
                   By the ford across the river.”

This is typical of Hiawatha’s deeds. Whatever he kills, for the most
part, lies _next to or in the water_, sometimes half in the water and
half on the land.[647] It seems that this must well be so. The later
adventures will teach us why this must be so. The buck was no ordinary
animal, but a magic one; that is to say, one with an additional
unconscious significance. Hiawatha made for himself gloves and moccasins
from its hide; the gloves imparted such strength to his arms that he
could crumble rocks to dust, and the moccasins had the virtue of the
seven-league boots. By enwrapping himself in the buck’s skin he really
became a giant. This motive, together with the death of the animal at
the ford,[648] in the water, reveals the fact that the parents are
concerned, whose gigantic proportions as compared with the child are of
great significance in the unconscious. The “toys of giants” is a wish
inversion of the infantile phantasy. The dream of an eleven-year-old
girl expresses this:

  “I am as high as a church steeple; then a policeman comes. I tell him,
  ‘If you say anything, I will cut off your head.’”

The “policeman,” as the analysis brought out, referred to the father,
whose gigantic size was over-compensated by the church steeple. In
Mexican human sacrifices, the gods were represented by criminals, who
were slaughtered, and flayed, and the Corybantes then clothed themselves
in the bloody skins, in order to illustrate the resurrection of the
gods.[649] (The snake’s casting of his skin as a symbol of
rejuvenation.)

Hiawatha has, therefore, conquered his parents, primarily the mother,
although in the form of a male animal (compare the bear of Mudjekeewis);
and from that comes his giant’s strength. He has taken on the parent’s
skin and now has himself become a great man. Now he started forth to his
first great battle to fight with the father Mudjekeewis, in order to
avenge his dead mother Wenonah. Naturally, under this figure of speech
hides the thought that he slays the father, in order to take possession
of the mother. Compare the battle of Gilgamesh with the giant Chumbaba
and the ensuing conquest of Ishtar. The father, in the psychologic
sense, merely represents the personification of the incest prohibition;
that is to say, resistance, which defends the mother. Instead of the
father, it may be a fearful animal (the great bear, the snake, the
dragon, etc.) which must be fought and overcome. The hero is a hero
because he sees in every difficulty of life resistance to the forbidden
treasure, and fights that resistance with the complete yearning which
strives towards the treasure, attainable with difficulty, or
unattainable, the yearning which paralyzes and kills the ordinary man.

Hiawatha’s father is Mudjekeewis, the west wind; the battle, therefore,
takes place in the west. Thence came life (impregnation of Wenonah);
thence also came death (death of Wenonah). Hiawatha, therefore, fights
the typical battle of the hero for rebirth in the western sea, the
battle with the devouring terrible mother, this time in the form of the
father. Mudjekeewis, who himself had acquired a divine nature, through
his conquest of the bear, now is overpowered by his son:

                 “Back retreated Mudjekeewis,
                 Rushing westward o’er the mountains,
                 Stumbling westward down the mountains,
                 Three whole days retreated fighting,
                 Still pursued by Hiawatha
                 To the doorways of the West-Wind,
                 To the portals of the Sunset,
                 To the earth’s remotest border,
                 Where into the empty spaces
                 Sinks the sun, as a flamingo
                 Drops into her nest at nightfall.”

The “three days” are a stereotyped form representing the stay in the sea
prison of night. (Twenty-first until twenty-fourth of December.) Christ,
too, remained three days in the underworld. “The treasure, difficult to
attain,” is captured by the hero during this struggle in the west. In
this case the father must make a great concession to the son; he gives
him divine nature,[650] that very wind nature, the immortality of which
alone protected Mudjekeewis from death. He says to his son:

                   “I will share my kingdom with you,
                   Ruler shall you be henceforward,
                   Of the Northwest-Wind, Keewaydin,
                   Of the home-wind, the Keewaydin.”

That Hiawatha now becomes ruler of the home-wind has its close parallel
in the Gilgamesh epic, where Gilgamesh finally receives the magic herb
from the wise old Utnapishtim, who dwells in the West, which brings him
safe once more over the sea to his home; but this, when he is home
again, is retaken from him by a serpent.

When one has slain the father, one can obtain possession of his wife,
and when one has conquered the mother, one can free one’s self.

On the return journey Hiawatha stops at the clever arrow-maker’s, who
possesses a lovely daughter:

                   “And he named her from the river,
                   From the water-fall he named her,
                   Minnehaha, Laughing Water.”

When Hiawatha, in his earliest childhood dreaming, felt the sounds of
water and wind press upon his ears, he recognized in these sounds of
nature the speech of his mother. The murmuring pine trees on the shore
of the great sea, said “Minnewawa.” And above the murmuring of the winds
and the splashing of the water he found his earliest childhood dreams
once again in a woman, “Minnehaha,” the laughing water. And the hero,
before all others, finds in woman the mother, in order to become a child
again, and, finally, to solve the riddle of immortality.

The fact that Minnehaha’s father is a skilful arrow-maker betrays him as
the father of the hero (and the woman he had with him as the mother).
The father of the hero is very often a skilful carpenter, or other
artisan. According to an Arabian legend, Tare,[651] Abraham’s father,
was a skilful master workman, who could carve arrows from any wood; that
is to say, in the Arabian form of speech, he was a procreator of
splendid sons.[652] Moreover, he was a maker of images of gods.
Tvashtar, Agni’s father, is the maker of the world, a smith and
carpenter, the discoverer of fire-boring. Joseph, the father of Jesus,
was also a carpenter; likewise Kinyras, Adonis’s father, who is said to
have invented the hammer, the lever, roofing and mining. Hephaestus, the
father of Hermes, is an artistic master workman and sculptor. In fairy
tales, the father of the hero is very modestly the traditional
wood-cutter. These conceptions were also alive in the cult of Osiris.
There the divine image was carved out of a tree trunk and then placed
within the hollow of the tree. (Frazer: “Golden Bough,” Part IV.) In
Rigveda, the world was also hewn out of a tree by the world-sculptor.
The idea that the hero is his own procreator[653] leads to the fact that
he is invested with paternal attributes, and reversedly the heroic
attributes are given to the father. In Mânî there exists a beautiful
union of the motives. He accomplishes his great labors as a religious
founder, hides himself for years in a cave, he dies, is skinned, stuffed
and hung up (hero). Besides he is an artist, and has a crippled foot. A
similar union of motives is found in Wieland, the smith.

Hiawatha kept silent about what he saw at the old arrow-maker’s on his
return to Nokomis, and he did nothing further to win Minnehaha. But now
something happened, which, if it were not in an Indian epic, would
rather be sought in the history of a neurosis. Hiawatha introverted his
libido; that is to say, he fell into an extreme resistance against the
“real sexual demand” (Freud); he built a hut for himself in the wood, in
order to fast there and to experience dreams and visions. For the first
three days he wandered, as once in his earliest youth, through a forest
and looked at all the animals and plants:

               “‘Master of life!’ he cried, desponding,
               ‘Must our lives depend on these things?’”

The question whether our lives must depend upon “these things” is very
strange. It sounds as if life were derived from these things; that is to
say, from nature in general. Nature seems suddenly to have assumed a
very strange significance. This phenomenon can be explained only through
the fact that a great amount of libido was stored up and now is given to
nature. As is well known, men of even dull and prosy minds, in the
springtime of love, suddenly become aware of nature, and even make poems
about it. But we know that libido, prevented from an actual way of
transference, always reverts to an earlier way of transference.
Minnehaha, the laughing water, is so clearly an allusion to the mother
that the secret yearning of the hero for the mother is powerfully
touched. Therefore, without having undertaken anything, he goes home to
Nokomis; but there again he is driven away, because Minnehaha already
stands in his path.

He turns, therefore, even further away, into that early youthful period,
the tones of which recall Minnehaha most forcibly to his thoughts, where
he learnt to hear the mother-sounds in the sounds of nature. In this
very strange revival of the impressions of nature we recognize a
regression to those earliest and strongest nature impressions which
stand next to the subsequently extinguished, even stronger, impressions
which the child received from the mother. The glamour of this feeling
for her is transferred to other objects of the childish environment
(father’s house, playthings, etc.), from which later those magic
blissful feelings proceed, which seem to be peculiar to the earliest
childish memories. When, therefore, Hiawatha hides himself in the lap of
nature, it is really the mother’s womb, and it is to be expected that he
will emerge again new-born in some form.

Before turning to this new creation arising from introversion, there is
still a further significance of the preceding question to be considered:
whether life is dependent upon “these things”? Life may depend upon
these things in the degree that they serve _for nourishment_. We must
infer in this case that suddenly the question of nutrition came very
near the hero’s heart. (This possibility will be thoroughly proven in
what follows.) The question of nutrition, indeed, enters seriously into
consideration. First, because regression to the mother necessarily
revives that special path of transference; namely, that of nutrition
through the mother. As soon as the libido regresses to the presexual
stage, there we may expect to see the function of nutrition and its
symbols put in place of the sexual function. Thence is derived an
essential root of the displacement from below upwards (Freud), because,
in the presexual stage, the principal value belongs not to the genitals,
but to the mouth. Secondly, because the hero fasted, his hunger becomes
predominant. Fasting, as is well known, is employed to silence
sexuality; also, it expresses symbolically the resistance against
sexuality, translated into the language of the presexual stage. On the
fourth day of his fast the hero ceased to address himself to nature; he
lay exhausted, with half-closed eyes, upon his couch, sunk deep in
dreams, the picture of extreme introversion.

We have already seen that, in such circumstances, an infantile internal
equivalent for reality appears, in the place of external life and
reality. This is also the case with Hiawatha:

                “And he saw a youth approaching,
                Dressed in garments green and yellow,
                Coming through the purple twilight,
                Through the splendor of the sunset;
                Plumes of green bent o’er his forehead,
                And his hair was soft and golden.”

This remarkable apparition reveals himself in the following manner to
Hiawatha:

                “From the Master of Life descending,
                I, the friend of man, Mondamin,
                Come to warn you and instruct you,
                How by struggle and by labor
                You shall gain what you have prayed for.
                Rise up from your bed of branches;
                Rise, O youth, and wrestle with me!”

Mondamin is the maize: a god, who is eaten, arising from Hiawatha’s
introversion. His hunger, taken in a double sense, his longing for the
nourishing mother, gives birth from his soul to another hero, the edible
maize, the son of the earth mother. Therefore, he again arises at
sunset, symbolizing the entrance into the mother, and in the western
sunset glow he begins again the mystic struggle with the self-created
god, the god who has originated entirely from the longing for the
nourishing mother. The struggle is again the struggle for liberation
from this destructive and yet productive longing. Mondamin is,
therefore, equivalent to the mother, and the struggle with him means the
overpowering and impregnation of the mother. This interpretation is
entirely proven by a myth of the Cherokees, “who invoke it (the maize)
under the name of ‘The Old Woman,’ in allusion to a myth that it sprang
from the blood of an old woman killed by her disobedient sons”:[654]

                  “Faint with famine, Hiawatha
                  Started from his bed of branches,
                  From the twilight of his wigwam
                  Forth into the flush of sunset
                  Came, and wrestled with Mondamin;
                  At his touch he felt new courage
                  Throbbing in his brain and bosom,
                  Felt new life and hope and vigor
                  Run through every nerve and fibre.”

The battle at sunset with the god of the maize gives Hiawatha new
strength; and thus it must be, because the fight for the individual
depths, against the paralyzing longing for the mother, gives creative
strength to men. Here, indeed, is the source of all creation, but it
demands heroic courage to fight against these forces and to wrest from
them the “treasure difficult to attain.” He who succeeds in this has, in
truth, attained the best. Hiawatha wrestles with himself for his
creation.[655] The struggle lasts again the charmed three days. The
fourth day, just as Mondamin prophesied, Hiawatha conquers him, and
Mondamin sinks to the ground in death. As Mondamin previously desired,
Hiawatha digs his grave in mother earth, and soon afterwards from this
grave the young and fresh maize grows for the nourishment of mankind.

Concerning the thought of this fragment, we have therein a beautiful
parallel to the mystery of Mithra, where first the battle of the hero
with his bull occurs. Afterwards Mithra carries in “transitus” the bull
into the cave, where he kills him. From this death all fertility grows,
all that is edible.[656] The cave corresponds to the grave. The same
idea is represented in the Christian mysteries, although generally in
more beautiful human forms. The soul struggle of Christ in Gethsemane,
where he struggles with himself in order to complete his work, then the
“transitus,” the carrying of the cross,[657] where he takes upon himself
the symbol of the destructive mother, and therewith takes himself to the
sacrificial grave, from which, after three days, he triumphantly arises;
all these ideas express the same fundamental thoughts. Also, the symbol
of eating is not lacking in the Christian mystery. Christ is a god who
is eaten in the Lord’s Supper. His death transforms him into bread and
wine, which we partake of in grateful memory of his great deed.[658] The
relation of Agni to the Somadrink and that of Dionysus to wine[659] must
not be omitted here. An evident parallel is Samson’s rending of the
lion, and the subsequent inhabitation of the dead lion by honey bees,
which gives rise to the well-known German riddle:

  “Speise ging von dem Fresser und Süssigkeit von dem Starken (Food went
  from the glutton and sweet from the strong).”[660]

In the Eleusinian mysteries these thoughts seem to have played a rôle.
Besides Demeter and Persephone, Iakchos is a chief god of the Eleusinian
cult; he was the “puer æternus,” the eternal boy, of whom Ovid says the
following:

            “Tu puer æternus, tu formosissimus alto
            Conspiceris cœlo tibi, cum sine cornibus astas,
            Virgineum caput est,” etc.[661]

In the great Eleusinian festival procession the image of Iakchos was
carried. It is not easy to say which god is Iakchos, possibly a boy, or
a new-born son, similar to the Etrurian Tages, who bears the surname
“the freshly ploughed boy,” because, according to the myth, he arose
from the furrow of the field behind the peasant, who was ploughing. This
idea shows unmistakably the Mondamin motive. The plough is of well-known
phallic meaning; the furrow of the field is personified by the Hindoos
as woman. The psychology of this idea is that of a coitus, referred back
to the presexual stage (stage of nutrition). The son is the edible fruit
of the field. Iakchos passes, in part, as son of Demeter or of
Persephone, also appropriately as consort of Demeter. (Hero as
procreator of himself.) He is also called τῆς Δήμητρος δαίμων (Δαίμων
equals libido, also Mother libido.) He was identified with Dionysus,
especially with the Thracian Dionysus-Zagreus, of whom a typical fate of
rebirth was related. Hera had goaded the Titans against Zagreus, who,
assuming many forms, sought to escape them, until they finally took him
when he had taken on the form of a bull. In this form he was killed
(Mithra sacrifice) and dismembered, and the pieces were thrown into a
cauldron; but Zeus killed the Titans by lightning, and swallowed the
still-throbbing heart of Zagreus. Through this act he gave him existence
once more, and Zagreus as Iakchos again came forth.

Iakchos carries the torch, the phallic symbol of procreation, as Plato
testifies. In the festival procession, the sheaf of corn, the cradle of
Iakchos, was carried. (λῖκνον, mystica vannus Iacchi.) The Orphic
legend[662] relates that Iakchos was brought up by Persephone, when,
after three years’ slumber in the λῖκνον,[663] he awoke. This statement
distinctly suggests the Mondamin motive. The 20th of Boedromion (the
month Boedromion lasts from about the 5th of September to the 5th of
October) is called Iakchos, in honor of the hero. On the evening of this
day the great torchlight procession took place on the seashore, in which
the quest and lament of Demeter was represented. The rôle of Demeter,
who, seeking her daughter, wanders over the whole earth without food or
drink, has been taken over by Hiawatha in the Indian epic. He turns to
all created things without obtaining an answer. As Demeter first learns
of her daughter from the subterranean Hecate, so does Hiawatha first
find the one sought for, Mondamin,[664] in the deepest introversion
(descent to the mother). Hiawatha produces from himself, Mondamin, as a
mother produces the son. The longing for the mother also includes the
producing mother (first devouring, then birth-giving). Concerning the
real contents of the mysteries, we learn through the testimony of Bishop
Asterius, about 390 A.D., the following:

  “Is not there (in Eleusis) the gloomiest descent, and the most solemn
  communion of the hierophant and the priestess; between him and her
  alone? Are the torches not extinguished, and does not the vast
  multitude regard as their salvation that which takes place between the
  two in the darkness?”[665]

That points undoubtedly to a ritual marriage, which was celebrated
subterraneously in mother earth. The Priestess of Demeter seems to be
the representative of the earth goddess, perhaps the furrow of the
field.[666] The descent into the earth is also the symbol of the
mother’s womb, and was a widespread conception under the form of cave
worship. Plutarch relates of the Magi that they sacrificed to Ahriman,
εἰς τόπον ἀνήλιον.[667] Lukian lets the magician Mithrobarzanes εἰς
χωρίον ἔρημον καὶ ὑλῶδες καὶ ἀνήλιον,[668] descend into the bowels of
the earth. According to the testimony of Moses of the Koran, the sister
Fire and the brother Spring were worshipped in Armenia in a cave. Julian
gave an account from the Attis legend of a κατάβασις εἰς ἄντρον,[669]
from whence Cybele brings up her son lover, that is to say, gives birth
to him.[670] The cave of Christ’s birth, in Bethlehem (‘House of
Bread’), is said to have been an Attis spelæum.

A further Eleusinian symbolism is found in the festival of Hierosgamos,
in the form of the _mystic chests_, which, according to the testimony of
Clemens of Alexandria, may have contained pastry, salt and fruits. The
synthema (confession) of the mystic transmitted by Clemens is suggestive
in still other directions:

  “I have fasted, I have drunk of the barleydrink, I have taken from the
  chest and after I have labored, I have placed it back in the basket,
  and from the basket into the chest.”

The question as to what lay in the chest is explained in detail by
Dieterich.[671] The labor he considers a phallic activity, which the
mystic has to perform. In fact, representations of the mystic basket are
given, wherein lies a phallus surrounded by fruits.[672] Upon the
so-called Lovatelli tomb vase, the sculptures of which are understood to
be Eleusinian ceremonies, it is shown how a mystic caressed the serpent
entwining Demeter. The caressing of the fear animal indicates a
religious conquering of incest.[673] According to the testimony of
Clemens of Alexandria, a serpent was in the chest. The serpent in this
connection is naturally of phallic nature, the phallus which is
forbidden in relation to the mother. Rohde mentions that in the
Arrhetophories, pastry, in the form of phalli and serpents, were thrown
into the cave near the Thesmophorion. This custom was a petition for the
bestowal of children and harvest.[674] The snake also plays a large part
in initiations under the remarkable title ὁ διὰ κόλπου θεός.[675]
Clemens observes that the symbol of the Sabazios mysteries is ὁ διὰ
κόλπων θεός, δράκων δὲ ἐστι καὶ οὗτος διελκόμενος τοῦ κόλπου τῶν
τελουμένων.[676]

Through Arnobius we learn:

  “Aureus coluber in sinum demittitur consecratis et eximitur rursus ab
  inferioribus partibus atque imis.”[677]

In the Orphic Hymn 52, Bacchus is invoked by ὑποκόλπιε,[678] which
indicates that the god enters into man as if through the female
genitals.[679] According to the testimony of Hippolytus, the hierophant
in the mystery exclaimed ἱερον ἔτεκε πότνια κοῦρον, Βριμὼ βριμόν (the
revered one has brought forth a holy boy, Brimos from Brimo). This
Christmas gospel, “Unto us a son is born,” is illustrated especially
through the tradition[680] that the Athenians “secretly show to the
partakers in the Epoptia, the great and wonderful and most perfect
Epoptic mystery, _a mown stalk of wheat_.”[681]

The parallel for the motive of death and resurrection is the motive of
losing and finding. The motive appears in religious rites in exactly the
same connection, namely, in spring festivities similar to the
Hierosgamos, where the image of the god was hidden and found again. It
is an uncanonical tradition that Moses left his father’s house when
twelve years old to teach mankind. In a similar manner Christ is lost by
his parents, and they find him again as a teacher of wisdom, just as in
the Mohammedan legend Moses and Joshua lose the fish, and in his place
Chidher, the teacher of wisdom, appears (like the boy Jesus in the
temple); so does the corn god, lost and believed to be dead, suddenly
arise again from his mother into renewed youth. (That Christ was laid in
the manger is suggestive of fodder. Robertson, therefore, places the
manger as parallel to the liknon.)

We understand from these accounts why the Eleusinian mysteries were for
the mystic so rich in comfort for the hope of a better world. A
beautiful Eleusinian epitaph shows this:

     “Truly, a beautiful secret is proclaimed by the blessed Gods!
     Mortality is not a curse, but death a blessing!”

The hymn to Demeter[682] in the mysteries also says the same:

       “Blessed is he, the earth-born man, who hath seen this!
       Who hath not shared in these divine ceremonies,
       He hath an unequal fate in the obscure darkness of death.”

Immortality is inherent in the Eleusinian symbol; in a church song of
the nineteenth century by Samuel Preiswerk we discover it again:

                 “The world is yours, Lord Jesus,
                 The world, on which we stand,
                 Because it is thy world
                 It cannot perish.
                 Only the wheat, before it comes
                 Up to the light in its fertility,
                 Must die in the bosom of the earth
                 First freed from its own nature.

                 “Thou goest, O Lord, our chief,
                 To heaven through thy sorrows,
                 And guide him who believes
                 In thee on the same path.
                 Then take us all equally
                 To share in thy sorrows and kingdoms,
                 Guide us through thy gate of death,
                 Bring thy world into the light.”

Firmicus relates concerning the Attis mysteries:

  “Nocte quadam simulacrum in lectica supinum ponitur et per numeros
  digestis fletibus plangitur; deinde cum se ficta lamentatione
  satiaverint, lumen infertur: tunc a sacerdote omnium qui flebant
  fauces unguentur, quibus perunctis sacerdos hoc lento murmure
  susurrat: ‘Θαρρεῖτε μύσται τοῦ Θεοῦ σεσωσμένου ἔσται γὰρ ἡμῖν ἐκ πόνου
  σωτηρία.’”[683]

Such parallels show how little human personality and how much divine,
that is to say, universally human, is found in the Christ mystery. No
man is or, indeed, ever was, a hero, for the hero is a god, and,
therefore, impersonal and generally applicable to all. Christ is a
“spirit,” as is shown in the very early Christian interpretation. In
different places of the earth, and in the most varied forms and in the
coloring of various periods, the Savior-hero appears as a fruit of the
entrance of the libido into the personal maternal depths. The Bacchian
consecrations represented upon the Farnese relief contain a scene where
a mystic wrapped in a mantle, drawn over his head, was led to Silen, who
holds the “λῖχνον” (chalice), covered with a cloth. The covering of the
head signifies death. The mystic dies, figuratively, like the seed corn,
grows again and comes to the corn harvest. Proclus relates that the
mystics were buried up to their necks. The Christian church as a place
of religious ceremony is really nothing but the grave of a hero
(catacombs). The believer descends into the grave, in order to rise from
the dead with the hero. That the meaning underlying the church is that
of the mother’s womb can scarcely be doubted. The symbols of Mass are so
distinct that the mythology of the sacred act peeps out everywhere. It
is the magic charm of rebirth. The veneration of the Holy Sepulchre is
most plain in this respect. A striking example is the Holy Sepulchre of
St. Stefano in Bologna. The church itself, a very old polygonal
building, consists of the remains of a temple to Isis. The interior
contains an artificial spelæum, a so-called Holy Sepulchre, into which
one creeps through a very little door. After a long sojourn, the
believer reappears reborn from this mother’s womb. An Etruscan ossuarium
in the archeological museum in Florence is at the same time a statue of
Matuta, the goddess of death; the clay figure of the goddess is hollowed
within as a receptacle for the ashes. The representations indicate that
Matuta is the mother. Her chair is adorned with sphinxes, as a fitting
symbol for the mother of death.

[Illustration: THE SO-CALLED HOLY SEPULCHRE OF S. STEFANO AT BOLOGNA]

Only a few of the further deeds of Hiawatha can interest us here. Among
these is the battle with Mishe-Nahma, the fish-king, in the eighth song.
This deserves to be mentioned as a typical battle of the sun-hero.
Mishe-Nahma is a fish monster, who dwells at the bottom of the waters.
Challenged by Hiawatha to battle, he devours the hero, together with his
boat:

                 “In his wrath he darted upward,
                 Flashing leaped into the sunshine,
                 Opened his great jaws, and swallowed
                 Both canoe and Hiawatha.

                 “Down into that darksome cavern
                 Plunged the headlong Hiawatha,
                 As a log on some black river
                 Shoots and plunges down the rapids,
                 Found himself in utter darkness,
                 Groped about in helpless wonder,
                 Till he felt a great heart beating,
                 Throbbing in that utter darkness.
                 And he smote it in his anger,
                 With his fist, the heart of Nahma,
                 Felt the mighty king of fishes
                 Shudder through each nerve and fibre.

                        ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

                 Crosswise then did Hiawatha
                 Drag his birch-canoe for safety,
                 Lest from out the jaws of Nahma,
                 In the turmoil and confusion,
                 Forth he might be hurled, and perish.”

It is the typical myth of the work of the hero, distributed over the
entire world. He takes to a boat, fights with the sea monster, is
devoured, he defends himself against being bitten or crushed[684]
(resistance or stamping motive); having arrived in the interior of the
“whale dragon,” he seeks the vital organ, which he cuts off or in some
way destroys. Often the death of the monster occurs as the result of a
fire which the hero secretly makes within him; he mysteriously creates
in the womb of death life, the rising sun. Thus dies the fish, which
drifts ashore, where, with the assistance of “birds,” the hero again
attains the light of day.[685] The bird in this sense probably means the
reascent of the sun, the longing of the libido, the rebirth of the
phœnix. (The longing is very frequently represented by the symbol of
hovering.) The sun symbol of the bird rising from the water is
(etymologically) contained in the singing swan. “Swan” is derived from
the root _sven_, like sun and tone. (See the preceding.) This act
signifies rebirth, and the bringing forth of life from the mother,[686]
and by this means the ultimate destruction of death, which, according to
a Negro myth, has come into the world, through the mistake of an old
woman, who, at the time of the general casting of skins (for men renewed
their youth through casting their skin like snakes), drew on, through
absent-mindedness, her old skin instead of a new one, and as a result
died. But the effect of such an act could not be of any duration. Again
and again troubles of the hero are renewed, always under the symbol of
deliverance from the mother. Just as Hera (as the pursuing mother) is
the real source of the great deeds of Hercules, so does Nokomis allow
Hiawatha no rest, and raises up new difficulties in his path, in form of
desperate adventures in which the hero may perhaps conquer, but also,
perhaps, may perish. The libido of mankind is always in advance of his
consciousness; unless his libido calls him forth to new dangers he sinks
into slothful inactivity or, on the other hand, childish longing for the
mother overcomes him at the summit of his existence, and he allows
himself to become pitifully weak, instead of striving with desperate
courage towards the highest. The mother becomes the demon, who summons
the hero to adventure, and who also places in his path the poisonous
serpent, which will strike him. Thus Nokomis, in the ninth song, calls
Hiawatha, points with her hand to the west, where the sun sets in purple
splendor, and says to him:

[Illustration: MATUTA, AN ETRUSCAN PIETÀ]

                “Yonder dwells the great Pearl-Feather,
                Megissogwon, the Magician,
                Manito of Wealth and Wampum,
                Guarded by his fiery serpents,
                Guarded by the black pitch-water.
                You can see his fiery serpents,
                The Kenabeek, the great serpents,
                Coiling, playing in the water.”

This danger lurking in the west is known to mean death, which no one,
even the mightiest, escapes. This magician, as we learn, also killed the
father of Nokomis. Now she sends her son forth to avenge the father
(Horus). Through the symbols attributed to the magician it may easily be
recognized what he symbolizes. Snake and water belong to the mother, the
snake as a symbol of the repressed longing for the mother, or, in other
words, as a symbol of resistance, encircles protectingly and defensively
the maternal rock, inhabits the cave, winds itself upwards around the
mother tree and guards the precious hoard, the “mysterious” treasure.
The black Stygian water is, like the black, muddy spring of Dhulqarnein,
the place where the sun dies and enters into rebirth, the maternal sea
of death and night. On his journey thither Hiawatha takes with him the
magic oil of Mishe-Nahma, which helps his boat through the waters of
death. (Also a sort of charm for immortality, like the dragon’s blood
for Siegfried, etc.)

First, Hiawatha slays the great serpent. Of the “night journey in the
sea” over the Stygian waters it is written:

                 “All night long he sailed upon it,
                 Sailed upon that sluggish water,
                 Covered with its mould of ages,
                 Black with rotting water-rushes,
                 Rank with flags, and leaves of lilies,
                 Stagnant, lifeless, dreary, dismal,
                 Lighted by the shimmering moonlight
                 And by will-o’-the-wisps illumined,
                 Fires by ghosts of dead men kindled,
                 In their weary night encampments.”

The description plainly shows the character of a water of death. The
contents of the water point to an already mentioned motive, that of
encoiling and devouring. It is said in the “Key to Dreams of
Jagaddeva”:[687]

  “Whoever in dreams surrounds his body with bast, creepers or ropes,
  with snake-skins, threads, or tissues, dies.”

I refer to the preceding arguments in regard to this. Having come into
the west land, the hero challenges the magician to battle. A terrible
struggle begins. Hiawatha is powerless, because Megissogwon is
invulnerable. At evening Hiawatha retires wounded, despairing for a
while, in order to rest:

                “Paused to rest beneath a pine-tree,
                From whose branches trailed the mosses,
                And whose trunk was coated over
                With the Dead-man’s Moccasin-leather,
                With the fungus white and yellow.”

This protecting tree is described as coated over with the moccasin
leather of the dead, the fungus. This investing of the tree with
anthropomorphic attributes is also an important rite wherever tree
worship prevails, as, for example, in India, where each village has its
sacred tree, which is clothed and in general treated as a human being.
The trees are anointed with fragrant waters, sprinkled with powder,
adorned with garlands and draperies. Just as among men, the piercing of
the _ears was performed as an apotropaic charm against death, so does it
occur with the holy tree_. Of all the trees of India there is none more
sacred to the Hindoos than the Aswatha (Ficus religiosa). It is known to
them as Vriksha Raja (king of trees), Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesvar live
in it, and the worship of it is the worship of the triad. Almost every
Indian village has an Aswatha,[688] etc. This “village linden tree,”
well known to us, is here clearly characterized as the mother symbol; it
contains the three gods.

Hence, when Hiawatha retires to rest under the pine-tree,[689] it is a
dangerous step, because he resigns himself to the mother, whose garment
is the garment of death (the devouring mother). As in the whale-dragon,
the hero also in this situation needs a “helpful bird”; that is to say,
the helpful animals, which represent the benevolent parents:

                 “Suddenly from the boughs above him
                 Sang the Mama, the woodpecker;
                 ‘Aim your arrows, Hiawatha,
                 At the head of Megissogwon,
                 Strike the tuft of hair upon it,
                 At their roots the long black tresses;
                 There alone can he be wounded.’”

Now, amusing to relate, Mama hurried to his help. It is a peculiar fact
that the woodpecker was also the “Mama” of Romulus and Remus, who put
nourishment into the mouths of the twins with his beak.[690] (Compare
with that the rôle of the vulture in Leonardo’s dream. The vulture is
sacred to Mars, like the woodpecker.) With the maternal significance of
the woodpecker, the ancient Italian folk-superstition agrees: that from
the tree upon which this bird nested any nail which has been driven in
will soon drop out again.[691] The woodpecker owes its special
significance to the circumstance that he _hammers holes into trees_.
(“To drive nails in,” as above!) It is, therefore, understandable that
he was made much of in the Roman legend as an old king of the country, a
possessor or ruler of the holy tree, the primitive image of the
Paterfamilias. An old fable relates how Circe, the spouse of King Picus,
transformed him into the Picus Martius, the woodpecker. The sorceress is
the “new-creating mother,” who has “magic influence” upon the
sun-husband. She kills him, transforms him into the soul-bird, the
unfulfilled wish. Picus was also understood as the wood demon and
incubus, as well as the soothsayer, all of which fully indicate the
mother libido.[692] Picus was often placed on a par with Picumnus by the
ancients. Picumnus is the inseparable companion of Pilumnus, and both
are actually called _infantium dii_, “the gods of little children.”
Especially it was said of Pilumnus that he defended new-born children
against the destroying attacks of the wood demon, Silvanus. (Good and
bad mother, the motive of the two mothers.)

The benevolent bird, a wish thought of deliverance which arises from
introversion,[693] advises the hero to shoot the magician under the
hair, which is the only vulnerable spot. This spot is the “phallic”
point,[694] if one may venture to say so; it is at _the top of the
head_, at the _place where the mystic birth from the head takes place_,
which even to-day appears in children’s sexual theories. Into that
Hiawatha shoots (one may say, very naturally) three arrows[695] (the
well-known phallic symbol), and thus kills Megissogwon. Thereupon he
steals the magic wampum armor, which renders him invulnerable (means of
immortality). He significantly leaves the dead lying in the
water—because the magician is the fearful mother:

                   “On the shore he left the body,
                   Half on land and half in water,
                   In the sand his feet were buried,
                   And his face was in the water.”

Thus the situation is the same as with the fish king, because the
monster is the personification of the water of death, which in its turn
represents the devouring mother. This great deed of Hiawatha’s, where he
has vanquished the mother as the death-bringing demon,[696] is followed
by his marriage with Minnehaha.

A little fable which the poet has inserted in the later song is
noteworthy. An old man is transformed into a youth, by _crawling through
a hollow oak tree_.

In the fourteenth song is a description of how Hiawatha discovers
writing. I limit myself to the description of two hieroglyphic tokens:

                  “Gitche Manito the Mighty,
                  He, the Master of Life, was painted
                  As an egg, with points projecting
                  To the four winds of the heavens.
                  Everywhere is the Great Spirit,
                  Was the meaning of this symbol.”

The world lies in the egg, which encompasses it at every point; it is
the cosmic woman with child, the symbol of which Plato as well as the
Vedas has made use of. This mother is like the air, which is everywhere.
But air is spirit; the mother of the world is a spirit:

                    “Mitche Manito the Mighty,
                    He the dreadful Spirit of Evil,
                    As a serpent was depicted,
                    As Kenabeek, the great serpent.”

But the spirit of evil is fear, is the forbidden desire, the adversary
who opposes not only each individual heroic deed, but life in its
struggle for eternal duration as well, and who introduces into our body
the poison of weakness and age through the treacherous bite of the
serpent. It is all that is retrogressive, and as the model of our first
world is our mother, all retrogressive tendencies are towards the
mother, and, therefore, are disguised under the incest image.

In both these ideas the poet has represented in mythologic symbols the
libido arising from the mother and the libido striving backward towards
the mother.

There is a description in the fifteenth song how Chibiabos, Hiawatha’s
best friend, the amiable player and singer, the embodiment of the joy of
life, was enticed by the evil spirits into ambush, fell through the ice
and was drowned. Hiawatha mourns for him so long that he succeeds, with
the aid of the magician, in calling him back again. But the revivified
friend is only a spirit, and he becomes master of the land of spirits.
(Osiris, lord of the underworld; the two Dioscuri.) Battles again
follow, and then comes the loss of a second friend, Kwasind, the
embodiment of physical strength.

In the twentieth song occur famine and the death of Minnehaha, foretold
by two taciturn guests from the land of death; and in the twenty-second
song Hiawatha prepares for a final journey to the west land:

                 “I am going, O Nokomis,
                 On a long and distant journey,
                 To the portals of the Sunset,
                 To the regions of the home-wind,
                 Of the Northwest-Wind Keewaydin.

                 “One long track and trail of splendor,
                 Down whose stream, as down a river,
                 Westward, westward, Hiawatha
                 Sailed into the fiery sunset,
                 Sailed into the purple vapors,
                 Sailed into the dusk of evening.

                 “Thus departed Hiawatha,
                 Hiawatha the Beloved,
                 In the glory of the sunset,
                 In the purple mists of evening,
                 To the regions of the home-wind,
                 Of the Northwest-Wind, Keewaydin,
                 To the Islands of the Blessed,
                 To the kingdom of Ponemah,
                 To the land of the Hereafter!”

The sun, victoriously arising, tears itself away from the embrace and
clasp, from the enveloping womb of the sea, and sinks again into the
maternal sea, into night, the all-enveloping and the all-reproducing,
leaving behind it the heights of midday and all its glorious works. This
image was the first, and was profoundly entitled to become the symbolic
carrier of human destiny; in the morning of life man painfully tears
himself loose from the mother, from the domestic hearth, to rise through
battle to his heights. Not seeing his worst enemy in front of him, but
bearing him within himself as a deadly longing for the depths within,
for drowning in his own source, for becoming absorbed into the mother,
his life is a constant struggle with death, a violent and transitory
delivery from the always lurking night. This death is no external enemy,
but a deep personal longing for quiet and for the profound peace of
non-existence, for a dreamless sleep in the ebb and flow of the sea of
life. Even in his highest endeavor for harmony and equilibrium, for
philosophic depths and artistic enthusiasm, he seeks death, immobility,
satiety and rest. If, like Peirithoos, he tarries too long in this place
of rest and peace, he is overcome by torpidity, and the poison of the
serpent paralyzes him for all time. If he is to live he must fight and
sacrifice his longing for the past, in order to rise to his own heights.
And having reached the noonday heights, he must also _sacrifice the love
for his own achievement_, for he may not loiter. The sun also sacrifices
its greatest strength in order to hasten onwards to the fruits of
autumn, which are the seeds of immortality; fulfilled in children, in
works, in posthumous fame, in a new order of things, all of which in
their turn begin and complete the sun’s course over again.

The “Song of Hiawatha” contains, as these extracts show, a material
which is very well adapted to bring into play the abundance of ancient
symbolic possibilities, latent in the human mind, and to stimulate it to
the creation of mythologic figures. But the products always contain the
same old problems of humanity, which rise again and again in new
symbolic disguise from the shadowy world of the unconscious. Thus Miss
Miller is reminded through the longing of Chiwantopel, of another mythic
cycle which appeared in the form of Wagner’s “Siegfried.” Especially is
this shown in the passage in Chiwantopel’s monologue, where he exclaims,
“There is not one who understands me, not one who resembles me, not one
who has a soul sister to mine.” Miss Miller observes that the sentiment
of this passage has the greatest analogy with the feelings which
Siegfried experienced for Brunhilde.

This analogy causes us to cast a glance at the song of Siegfried,
especially at the relation of Siegfried and Brunhilde. It is a
well-recognized fact that Brunhilde, the Valkyr, gives protection to the
birth (incestuous) of Siegfried, but while Sieglinde is the human
mother, Brunhilde has the rôle of “spiritual mother” (mother-imago);
however, unlike Hera towards Hercules, she is not a pursuer, but
benevolent. This sin, in which she is an accomplice, by means of the
help she renders, is the reason for her banishment by Wotan. The strange
birth of Siegfried from the sister-wife distinguishes him as Horus, as
the _reborn son_, a reincarnation of the retreating Osiris—Wotan. The
birth of the young son, of the hero, results, indeed, from mankind, who,
however, are merely the human bearers of the cosmic symbolism. Thus the
birth is protected by the spirit mother (Hera, Lilith): she sends
Sieglinde with the child in her womb (Mary’s flight) on the “night
journey on the sea” to the east:

                    “Onward, hasten;
                    Turn to the East.

                           ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

                    O woman, thou cherishest
                    The sublimest hero of the world
                    In thy sheltering womb.”

The motive of dismemberment is found again in the broken sword of
Siegmund, which was kept for Siegfried. From the dismemberment life is
pieced together again. (The Medea wonder.) Just as a smith forges the
pieces together, so is the dismembered dead again put together. (This
comparison is also found in “Timaios” of Plato: the parts of the world
joined together with pegs.) In the Rigveda, 10, 72, the creator of the
world, Brahmanaspati, is a smith.

                    “Brahmanaspati, as a blacksmith,
                    Welded the world together.”

The sword has the significance of the phallic sun power; therefore, a
sword proceeds from the mouth of the apocalyptic Christ; that is to say,
the procreative fire, the word, or the procreative Logos. In Rigveda,
Brahmanaspati is also a prayer-word, which possessed an ancient creative
significance:[697]

        “And this prayer of the singers, expanding from itself,
        Became a cow, which was already there before the world,
        Dwelling together in the womb of this god,
        Foster-children of the same keeper are the gods.”

                           —_Rigveda_ x: 31.

The Logos became a cow; that is to say, the mother, who is pregnant with
the gods. (In Christian uncanonical phantasies, where the Holy Ghost has
feminine significance, we have the well-known motive of the two mothers,
the earthly mother, Mary, and the spiritual mother, the Holy Ghost.) The
transformation of the Logos into the mother is not remarkable in itself,
because the origin of the phenomenon fire-speech seems to be the
mother-libido, according to the discussion in the earlier chapter. The
_spiritual is the mother-libido_. The significance of the sword, in the
Sanskrit conception, têjas, is probably partly determined by its
sharpness, as is shown above, in its connection with the libido
conception. The motive of pursuit (the pursuing Sieglinde, analogous to
Leto) is not here bound up with the spiritual mother, but with Wotan,
therefore corresponding to the Linos legend, where the father of the
wife is also the pursuer. Wotan is also the father of Brunhilde.
Brunhilde stands in a peculiar relation to Wotan. Brunhilde says to
Wotan:

  “Thou speakest to the will of Wotan By telling me what thou wishest:
  Who ... am I Were I not thy will?”

  _Wotan_:

  I take counsel only with myself, When I speak with thee....

Brunhilde is also somewhat the “angel of the face,” that creative will
or word,[698] emanating from God, also the Logos, which became the
child-bearing woman. God created the world through his word; that is to
say, his mother, the woman who is to bring him forth again. (He lays his
own egg.) This peculiar conception, it seems to me, can be explained by
assuming that the libido overflowing into speech (thought) has preserved
its sexual character to an extraordinary degree as a result of the
inherent inertia. In this way the “word” had to execute and fulfil all
that was denied to the sexual wish; namely, the return into the mother,
in order to attain eternal duration. The “word” fulfils this wish by
itself becoming the daughter, the wife, the mother of the God, who
brings him forth anew.[699]

Wagner has this idea vaguely in his mind in Wotan’s lament over
Brunhilde:

                  “None as she knew my inmost thought;
                  None knew the source of my will
                  As she;
                  She herself was
                  The creating womb of my wish;
                  And so now she has broken
                  The blessed union!”

Brunhilde’s sin is the favoring of Siegmund, but, behind this, lies
incest: this is projected into the brother-sister relation of Siegmund
and Sieglinde; in reality, and archaically expressed, Wotan, the father,
has entered into his self-created daughter, in order to rejuvenate
himself. But this fact must, of course, be veiled. Wotan is rightly
indignant with Brunhilde, for she has taken the Isis rôle and through
the birth of the son has deprived the old man of his power. The first
attack of the death serpent in the form of the son, Siegmund, Wotan has
repelled; he has broken Siegmund’s sword, but Siegmund rises again in a
grandson. This inevitable fate is always helped by the woman; hence the
wrath of Wotan.

At Siegfried’s birth Sieglinde dies, as is proper. The
foster-mother[700] is apparently not a woman, but a chthonic god, a
crippled dwarf, who belongs to that tribe which renounces love.[701] The
Egyptian god of the underworld, the crippled shadow of Osiris (who
celebrated a melancholy resurrection in the sexless semi-ape
Harpocrates), is the tutor of Horus, who has to avenge the death of his
father.

Meanwhile Brunhilde sleeps the enchanted sleep, like a Hierosgamos, upon
a mountain, where Wotan has put her to sleep[702] with the magic thorn
(Edda), surrounded by the flames of Wotan’s fire (equal to libido[703]),
which wards off every one. But Mime becomes Siegfried’s enemy and wills
his death through Fafner. Here Mime’s dynamic nature is revealed; he is
a masculine representation of the terrible mother, also a foster-mother
of demoniac nature, who places the poisonous worm (Typhon) in her son’s
(Horus’s) path. Siegfried’s longing for the mother drives him away from
Mime, and his travels begin with the mother of death, and lead through
vanquishing the “terrible mother”[704] to the woman:

               _Siegfried_:

                 Off with the imp!
                 I ne’er would see him more!
                 Might I but know what my mother was like
                 That will my thought never tell me!
                 Her eyes’ tender light
                 Surely did shine
                 Like the soft eyes of the doe!

Siegfried decides to separate from the demon which was the mother in the
past, and he gropes forward with the longing directed towards the
mother. Nature acquires a hidden maternal significance for him (“doe”);
in the tones of nature he discovers a suggestion of the maternal voice
and the maternal language:

                _Siegfried_:

                Thou gracious birdling,
                Strange art thou to me!
                Dost thou in the wood here dwell?
                Ah, would that I could take thy meaning!
                Thy song something would say—
                Perchance—of my loving mother!

This psychology we have already encountered in Hiawatha. By means of his
dialogue with the bird (bird, like wind and arrow, represents the wish,
the winged longing) Siegfried entices Fafner from the cave. His desires
turn back to the mother, and the chthonic demon, the cave-dwelling
terror of the woods, appears. Fafner is the protector of the treasure;
in his cave lies the hoard, the source of life and power. The mother
possesses the libido of the son, and jealously does she guard it.
Translated into psychological language, this means the positive
transference succeeds only through the release of the libido from the
mother-imago, the incestuous object in general. Only in this manner is
it possible to gain one’s libido, the incomparable treasure, and this
requires a mighty struggle, the whole battle of adaptation.[705] The
Siegfried legend has abundantly described the outcome of this battle
with Fafner. According to the Edda, Siegfried eats Fafner’s heart, the
seat of life. He wins the magic cap, through whose power Alberich had
changed himself into a serpent. This refers to the motive of casting the
skin, rejuvenation. By means of the magic cap one can vanish and assume
different shapes. The vanishing probably refers to dying and to the
invisible presence; that is, existence in the mother’s womb. A
luck-bringing cap, amniotic covering, the new-born child occasionally
wears over his head (the caul). Moreover, Siegfried drinks the dragon’s
blood, which makes it possible for him to understand the language of
birds, and consequently he enters into a peculiar relation with Nature,
a dominating position, the result of his knowledge, and finally wins the
treasure.

_Hort_ is a mediæval and Old High German word with the meaning of
“collected and guarded treasure”; Gothic, _huzd_; Old Scandinavian,
_hodd_; Germanic _hozda_, from pre-Germanic _kuzdhó_—for _kudtho_—“the
concealed.” Kluge[706] adds to this the Greek κεύθω, έκυθον = “to hide,
to conceal.” Also _hut_ (_hut_, to guard; English, hide), Germanic root
_hud_, from Indo-Germanic _kuth_ (questionable), to Greek κεύθω and
κύσθος, “cavity,” feminine genitals. Prellwitz,[707] too, traces Gothic
_huzd_, Anglo-Saxon _hyde_, English hide and hoard, to Greek κεύθω.
Whitley Stokes traces English hide, Anglo-Saxon _hydan_, New High German
_Hütte_, Latin _cûdo_ = helmet; Sanskrit _kuhara_ (cave?) to primitive
Celtic _koudo_ = concealment; Latin, _occultatio_.

The assumption of Kluge is also supported in other directions; namely,
from the point of view of the primitive idea:

  “There exists in Athens[708] a sacred place (a Temenos) of Ge, with
  the surname Olympia. Here the ground is torn open for about a yard in
  width; and they say, after the flood at the time of Deucalion, that
  the water receded here; and every year they throw into the fissure
  wheatmeal, kneaded with honey.”

We have observed previously that among the Arrhetophorian, pastry in the
form of snakes and phalli, was thrown into a crevice in the earth. This
was mentioned in connection with the ceremonies of fertilizing the
earth. We have touched slightly already upon the sacrifice in the earth
crevice among the Watschandies. The flood of death has passed
characteristically into the crevice of the earth; that is, back into the
mother again; because from the mother the universal great death has come
in the first place. The flood is simply the counterpart of the vivifying
and all-producing water: Ὠκεανοῦ, ὅσπερ γένεσις πάντεσσι τέτυκται.[709]
One sacrifices the honey cake to the mother, so that she may spare one
from death. Thus every year in Rome a gold sacrifice was thrown into the
lacus Curtius, into the former fissure in the earth, which could only be
closed through the sacrificial death of Curtius. He was the typical
hero, who has journeyed into the underworld, in order to conquer the
danger threatening the Roman state from the opening of the abyss.
(Kaineus, Amphiaraos.) In the Amphiaraion of Oropos those healed through
the temple incubation threw their gifts of gold into the sacred well, of
which Pausanias says:

  “If any one is healed of a sickness through a saying of the oracle,
  then it is customary to throw a silver or gold coin into the well;
  because here Amphiaraos has ascended as a god.”

It is probable that this oropic well is also the place of his
“Katabasis” (descent into the lower world). There were many entrances
into Hades in antiquity. Thus near Eleusis there was an abyss, through
which Aidoneus passed up and down, when he kidnapped Cora. (Dragon and
maiden: the libido overcome by resistance, life replaced by death.)
There were crevices in the rocks, through which souls could ascend to
the upper world. Behind the temple of Chthonia in Hermione lay a sacred
district of Pluto, with a ravine through which Hercules had brought up
Cerberus; in addition, there was an “Acherusian” lake.[710] This ravine
was, therefore, the entrance to the place where death was conquered. The
lake also belongs here as a further mother symbol, for symbols appear
massed together, as they are surrogates, and, therefore, do not afford
the same satisfaction of desire as accorded by reality, so that the
unsatisfied remnant of the libido must seek still further symbolic
outlets. The ravine in the Areopagus in Athens was considered the seat
of inhabitants of the lower world. An old Grecian custom[711] suggests a
similar idea. Girls were sent into a cavern, where a poisonous snake
dwelt, as a test of virginity. If they were bitten by the snake, it was
a token that they were no longer chaste. We find this same motive again
in the Roman legend of St. Silvester, at the end of the fifth
century:[712]

  “Erat draco immanissimus in monte Tarpeio, in quo est Capitolium
  collocatum. Ad hunc draconem per CCCLXV gradus, quasi ad infernum,
  magi cum virginibus sacrilegis descendebant semel in mense cum
  sacrificiis et lustris, ex quibus esca poterat tanto draconi inferri.
  Hic draco subito ex improviso ascendebat et licet non ingrederetur
  vicinos tamen aeres flatu suo vitiabat. Ex quo mortalitas hominum et
  maxima luctus de morte veniebat infantum. (Lilith motive.) Sanctus
  itaque Silvester cum haberet cum paganis pro defensione veritatis
  conflictum, ad hoc venit ut dicerent ei pagani: ‘Silvester descende ad
  draconem et fac eum in nomine Dei tui vel uno anno ab interfectione
  generis humani cessare.’”[713]

St. Peter appeared to Silvester in a dream and advised him to close his
door to the underworld with chains, according to the model in
Revelation, chap, xx:

  (1) “And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
  bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.

  (2) “And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the
  Devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand years.

  (3) “And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a
  seal upon him.”

The anonymous author of a writing, “De Promissionibus,”[714] of the
beginning of the fifth century, mentions a very similar legend:

  “Apud urbem Romam specus quidam fuit in quo draco miræ magnitudinis
  mechanica arte formatus, gladium ore gestans,[715] oculis rutilantibus
  gemmis[716] metuendus ac terribilis apparebat. Hinc annuæ devotæ
  virgines floribus exornatæ, eo modo in sacrificio dabantur, quatenus
  inscias munera deferentes gradum scalæ, quo certe ille arte diaboli
  draco pendebat, contingentes impetus venientis gladii perimeret, ut
  sanguinem funderet innocentem. Et hunc quidam monachus, bene ob
  meritum cognitus Stiliconi tunc patricio, eo modo subvertit; baculo,
  manu, singulos gradus palpandos inspiciens, statim ut illum tangens
  fraudem diabolicam repperit, eo transgresso descendens, draconem
  scidit, misitque in partes: ostendens et hie deos non esse qui manu
  fiunt.”[717]

The _hero battling with the dragon has much in common with the dragon_,
and also he takes over his qualities; for example, invulnerability. As
the footnotes show, the similarity is carried still further (sparkling
eyes, sword in his mouth). Translated psychologically, the dragon is
merely the son’s repressed longing, striving towards the mother;
therefore, the son is the dragon, as even Christ is identified with the
serpent, which, once upon a time, similia similibus, had controlled the
snake plague in the Wilderness. John iii: 14. _As a serpent he is to be
crucified; that is to say, as one striving backwards towards the mother,
he must die hanging or suspended on the mother tree._ Christ and the
dragon of the Antichrist are in the closest contact in the history of
their appearance and their cosmic meaning. (Compare Bousset, the
Antichrist.) The legend of the dragon concealed in the Antichrist myth
belongs to the life of the hero, and, therefore, is immortal. In none of
the newer forms of myth are the pairs of opposites so perceptibly near
as in that of Christ and Antichrist. (I refer to the remarkable
psychologic description of this problem in Mereschkowski’s romance,
“Leonardo da Vinci.”) That the dragon is only an artifice is a useful
and delightfully rationalistic conceit, which is most significant for
that period. In this way the dismal gods were effectually vulgarized.
The schizophrenic insane readily make use of this mechanism, in order to
depreciate efficient personalities. One often hears the stereotyped
lament, “It is all a play, artificial, made up,” etc. A dream of a
“schizophrenic” is most significant; he is sitting in a dark room, which
has only a single small window, through which he can see the sky. The
sun and moon appear, but they are only made artificially from oil paper.
(Denial of the deleterious incest influence.)

The descent of the three hundred and sixty-five steps refers to the
sun’s course, to the cavern of death and rebirth. That this cavern
actually stands in a relation to the subterranean mother of death can be
shown by a note in Malalas, the historian of Antioch,[718] who relates
that Diocletian consecrated there a crypt to Hecate, to which one
descends by three hundred and sixty-five steps. Cave mysteries seem to
have been celebrated for Hecate in Samothrace as well. The serpent also
played a great part as a regular symbolic attribute in the service of
Hecate. The mysteries of Hecate flourished in Rome towards the end of
the fourth century, so that the two foregoing legends might indeed
relate to her cult. Hecate[719] is a real spectral goddess of night and
phantoms, a Mar; she is represented as riding, and in Hesiod occurs as
the _patron_ of riders. She sends the horrible nocturnal fear phantom,
the Empusa, of whom Aristophanes says that she appears inclosed in a
_bladder swollen with blood_. According to Libanius, the mother of
Aischines is also called Empusa, for the reason that “ἐκ σκοτεινῶν τόπων
τοῖς παισὶν καὶ ταῖς γυναιξίν ὡρμᾶτο.”[720]

Empusa, like Hecate, has _peculiar_ feet; one foot is made of brass, the
other of ass’ dung. Hecate has snakelike feet, which, as in the triple
form ascribed to Hecate, points to her phallic libido nature.[721] In
Tralles, Hecate appears next to Priapus; there is also a Hecate
Aphrodisias. Her symbols are the key,[722] the whip,[723] the
snake,[724] the dagger[725] and the torch.[726] As mother of death, dogs
accompany her, the significance of which we have previously discussed at
length. As guardian of the door of Hades and as Goddess of dogs, she is
of threefold form, and really identified with Cerberus. Thus Hercules,
in bringing up Cerberus, brings the conquered mother of death into the
upper world. As spirit mother (moon!), she sends madness, lunacy. (This
mythical observation states that “the mother” sends madness; by far the
majority of the cases of insanity consist, in fact, in the domination of
the individual by the material of the incest phantasy.) In the mysteries
of Cerberus, a rod, called λευκόφυλλος,[727] was broken off. This rod
protected the purity of virgins, and caused any one who touched the
plant to become insane. We recognize in this the motive of the sacred
tree, which, as mother, must not be touched, an act which only an insane
person would commit. Hecate, as nightmare, appears in the form of
Empusa, in a vampire rôle, or as Lamia, as devourer of men; perhaps,
also, in that more beautiful guise, “The Bride of Corinth.” She is the
mother of all charms and witches, the patron of Medea, because the power
of the “terrible mother” is magical and irresistible (working upward
from the unconscious). In Greek syncretism, she plays a very significant
rôle. She is confused with Artemis, who also has the surname ἑκάτη,[728]
“the one striking at a distance” or “striking according to her will,” in
which we recognize again her superior power. Artemis is the huntress,
with hounds, and so Hecate, through confusion with her, becomes
κυνηγετική, the wild nocturnal huntress. (God, as huntsman, see above.)
She has her name in common with Apollo, ἕκατος ἑκάεργος.[729] From the
standpoint of the libido theory, this connection is easily
understandable, because Apollo merely symbolizes the more positive side
of the same amount of libido. The confusion of Hecate with Brimo as
subterranean mother is understandable; also with Persephone and Rhea,
the primitive all-mother. Intelligible through the maternal significance
is the confusion with Ilithyia, the midwife. Hecate is also the direct
goddess of births, κουροτρόφος,[730] the multiplier of cattle, and
goddess of marriage. Hecate, orphically, occupies the centre of the
world as Aphrodite and Gaia, even as the world soul in general. On a
carved gem[731] she is represented carrying the cross on her head. The
beam on which the criminal was scourged is called ἑκάτη.[732] To her, as
to the Roman Trivia, the triple roads, or _Scheideweg_, “forked road,”
or crossways were dedicated. And where roads branch off or unite
sacrifices of dogs were brought her; there the bodies of the executed
were thrown; the sacrifice occurs at the _point of crossing_.
Etymologically, _scheide_, “sheath”; for example, sword-sheath, sheath
for water-shed and sheath for vagina, is identical with _scheiden_, “to
split,” or “to separate.” The meaning of a sacrifice at this place
would, therefore, be as follows: to offer something to the mother at the
place of junction or at the fissure. (Compare the sacrifice to the
chthonic gods in the abyss.) The Temenos of Ge, the abyss and the well,
are easily understood as the gates of life and death,[733] “past which
every one gladly creeps” (Faust), and sacrifices there his obolus or his
πελανοί,[734] instead of his body, just as Hercules soothes Cerberus
with the honey cakes. (Compare with this the mythical significance of
the dog!) Thus the crevice at Delphi, with the spring, Castalia, was the
seat of the chthonic dragon, Python, who was conquered by the sun-hero,
Apollo. (Python, incited by Hera, pursued Leta, pregnant with Apollo;
but she, on the floating island of Delos [nocturnal journey on the sea],
gave birth to her child, who later slew the Python; that is to say,
conquered in it the spirit mother.) In Hierapolis (Edessa) the temple
was erected above the crevice through which the flood had poured out,
and in Jerusalem the foundation stone of the temple covered the great
abyss,[735] just as Christian churches are frequently built over caves,
grottoes, wells, etc. In the Mithra grotto,[736] and all the other
sacred caves up to the Christian catacombs, which owe their significance
not to the legendary persecutions but to the worship of the dead,[737]
we come across the same fundamental motive. The burial of the dead in a
holy place (in the “garden of the dead,” in cloisters, crypts, etc.) is
restitution to the mother, with the certain hope of resurrection by
which such burial is rightfully rewarded. The animal of death which
dwells in the cave had to be soothed in early times through human
sacrifices; later with natural gifts.[738] Therefore, the Attic custom
gives to the dead the μελιτοῦττα, to pacify the dog of hell, the
three-headed monster at the gate of the underworld. A more recent
elaboration of the natural gifts seems to be the obolus for Charon, who
is, therefore, designated by Rohde as the second Cerberus, corresponding
to the Egyptian dog-faced god Anubis.[739] Dog and serpent of the
underworld (Dragon) are likewise identical. In the tragedies, the
Erinnyes are serpents as well as dogs; the serpents Tychon and Echnida
are parents of the serpents—Hydra, the dragon of the Hesperides, and
Gorgo; and of the dogs, Cerberus, Orthrus, Scylla.[740] Serpents and
dogs are also protectors of the treasure. The chthonic god was probably
always a serpent dwelling in a cave, and was fed with πελανοί.[741] In
the Asclepiadean of the later period, the sacred serpents were scarcely
visible, meaning that they probably existed only figuratively.[742]
Nothing was left but the hole in which the snake was said to dwell.
There the πελανοί[743] were placed; later the obolus was thrown in. The
sacred cavern in the temple of Kos consisted of a rectangular pit, upon
which was laid a stone lid, with a square hole; this arrangement serves
the purpose of a treasure house. The snake hole had become a slit for
money, a “sacrificial box,” and the cave had become a “treasure.” That
this development, which Herzog traces, agrees excellently with the
actual condition is shown by a discovery in the temple of Asclepius and
Hygieia in Ptolemais:

  “An encoiled granite snake, with arched neck, was found. In the middle
  of the coil is seen a narrow slit, polished by usage, just large
  enough to allow a coin of four centimeters diameter at most to fall
  through. At the side are holes for handles to lift the heavy pieces,
  the under half of which is used as a cover.”—_Herzog_, _Ibid._, p.
  212.

The serpent, as protector of the hoard, now lies on the treasure house.
The fear of the maternal womb of death has become the guardian of the
treasure of life. That the snake in this connection is really a symbol
of death, that is to say, of the dead libido, results from the fact that
the souls of the dead, like the chthonic gods, appear as _serpents_, as
dwellers in the kingdom of the mother of death.[744] This development of
symbol allows us to recognize easily the transition of the originally
very primitive significance of the crevice in the earth as mother to the
meaning of treasure house, and can, therefore, support the etymology of
_Hort_, “hoard, treasure,” as suggested by Kluge, κεύθω, belonging to
κὲῦθος, means the innermost womb of the earth (Hades); κύσθος, that
Kluge adds, is of similar meaning, cavity or womb. Prellwitz does not
mention this connection. Fick,[745] however, compares New High German
_hort_, Gothic _huzd_, to Armenian _kust_, “abdomen”; Church Slavonian
_čista_, Vedic _kostha_ = abdomen, from the Indo-Germanic root
_koustho -s_ = viscera, lower abdomen, room, store-room. Prellwitz
compares κύσθος κύστις = urinary bladder, bag, purse; Sanskrit
_kustha-s_ = cavity of the loins; then κύτος = cavity, vault; κύτις =
little chest, from κυέω = I am pregnant. Here, from κύτος = cave, κύυαρ
= hole, κύαθος = cup, κύλα - depression under the eye, κῦμα = swelling,
wave, billow, κῦρος = power, force, κύριος = lord, Old Iranian _caur_,
_cur_ = hero; Sanskrit _çura -s_ = strong, hero. The fundamental
Indo-Germanic roots[746] are _kevo_ = to swell, to be strong. From that
the above-mentioned κυέω, κύαρ, κῦρος and Latin _cavus_ = hollow,
vaulted, cavity, hole; _cavea_ = cavity, enclosure, cage, scene and
assembly; _caulæ_ = cavity, opening, enclosure, stall[747]; _kuéyô_ =
swell; participle, _kueyonts_ = swelling; _en-kueyonts_ = pregnant,
ἐγηυέων = Latin _inciens_ = pregnant; compare Sanskrit _vi-çvá-yan_ =
swelling; _kûro -s_ (_kevaro -s_), strong, powerful hero.

The treasure which the hero fetches from the dark cavern is swelling
life; it is himself, the hero, new-born from the anxiety of pregnancy
and the birth throes. Thus the Hindoo fire-bringer is called Mâtariçvan,
meaning the one swelling in the mother. The _hero striving towards the
mother is the dragon, and when he separates from the mother he becomes
the conqueror of the dragon_.[748] This train of thought, which we have
already hinted at previously in Christ and Antichrist, may be traced
even into the details of Christian phantasy. There is a series of
mediæval pictures[749] in which the communion cup contains a dragon, a
snake or some sort of small animal.[750]

The cup is the receptacle, the maternal womb, of the god resurrected in
the wine; the cup is the cavern where the serpent dwells, the god who
sheds his skin, in the state of metamorphosis; for Christ is also the
serpent. These symbolisms are used in an obscure connection in I
Corinthians, verse 10: Paul writes of the Jews who “were all baptized
unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea” (also reborn) and “did all drink
the same spiritual drink; for they drank of that spiritual rock that
followed them, and that rock was Christ.” They drank from the mother
(the generative rock, birth from the rock) the milk of rejuvenation, the
mead of immortality, and this Rock was Christ, here identified with the
mother, because he is the symbolic representative of the mother libido.
When we drink from the cup, then we drink from the mother’s breast
immortality and everlasting salvation. Paul wrote of the Jews that they
ate and then rose up to dance and to indulge in fornication, and then
twenty-three thousand of them were swept off by the plague of serpents.
The remedy for the survivors, however, was the sight of a serpent
hanging on a pole. From it was derived the cure.

[Illustration: THE DRAGON IN THE GOBLET]

  “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
  blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
  the body of Christ? For we being many are one bread, and one body; for
  we are all partakers of one bread.”—_I Corinthians_ x: 16, 17.

Bread and wine are the body and the blood of Christ; the food of the
immortals who are brothers with Christ, ἀδελφοί, those who come from the
same womb. We who are reborn again from the mother are all heroes
together with Christ, and enjoy immortal food. As with the Jews, so too
with the Christians, there is imminent danger of unworthy partaking, for
this mystery, which is very closely related psychologically with the
subterranean Hierosgamos of Eleusis, involves a mysterious union of man
in a spiritual sense,[751] which was constantly misunderstood by the
profane and was retranslated into his language, where mystery is
equivalent to orgy and secrecy to vice.[752] A very interesting
blasphemer and sectarian of the beginning of the nineteenth century
named Unternährer has made the following comment on the last supper:

  “The communion of the devil is in this brothel. All they sacrifice
  here, they sacrifice to the devil and not to God. There they have the
  devil’s cup and the devil’s dish; _there they have sucked the head of
  the snake_,[753] there they have fed upon the iniquitous bread and
  drunken the wine of wickedness.”[754]

Unternährer is an adherent or a forerunner of the “theory of living
one’s own nature.” He dreams of himself as a sort of priapic divinity;
he says of himself:

  “Black-haired, very charming and handsome in countenance, and every
  one enjoys listening to thee on account of the amiable speeches which
  come from thy mouth; therefore the maids love thee.”

He preaches “the cult of nakedness.”

  “Ye fools and blind men, behold God has created man in his image, as
  male and female, and has blessed them and said, ‘Be fruitful and
  multiply and fill the earth, and make it subject to thee.’ Therefore,
  he has given the greatest honor to these poor members and has placed
  them naked in the garden,” etc.

  “Now are the fig leaves and the covering removed, because thou hast
  turned to the Lord, for the Lord is the Spirit, and where the spirit
  of the Lord is, there is freedom,[755] there the clearness of the Lord
  is mirrored with uncovered countenance. This is precious before God,
  and this is the glory of the Lord, and the adornment of our God, when
  you stand in the image and honor of your God, as God created you,
  naked and not ashamed.

  “Who can ever praise sufficiently in the sons and daughters of the
  living God those parts of the body which are destined to procreate?

  “In the lap of the daughters of Jerusalem is the gate of the Lord, and
  the Just will go into the temple there, to the altar.[756] And in the
  lap of the sons of the living God is the water-pipe of the upper part,
  which is a tube, like a rod, to measure the temple and altar. And
  under the water-tube the sacred stones are placed, as a sign and
  testimony of the Lord, who has taken to himself the seed of Abraham.

  “Out of the seeds in the chamber of the mother, God creates a man with
  his hands, as an image of himself. Then the mother house and the
  mother chamber is opened in the daughters of the Living God, and God
  himself brings forth a child through them. Thus God creates children
  from the stones, for the seed comes from the stones.”[757]

History teaches in manifold examples how the religious mysteries are
liable to change suddenly into sexual orgies because they have
originated from an overvaluation of the orgy. It is characteristic that
this priapic divinity[758] returns again to the old symbol of the snake,
which in the mystery enters into the faithful, fertilizing and
spiritualizing them, although it originally possessed a phallic
significance. In the mysteries of the Ophites, the festival was really
celebrated with serpents, in which the animals were even kissed.
(Compare the caressing of the snake of Demeter in the Eleusinian
mysteries.) In the sexual orgies of the modern Christian sects the
phallic kiss plays a very important rôle. Unternährer was an
uncultivated, crazy peasant, and it is unlikely that the Ophitic
religious ceremonies were known to him.

The phallic significance is expressed negatively or mysteriously through
the serpent, which always points to a secret related thought. This
related thought connects with the mother; thus, in a dream a patient
found the following imagery: “A serpent shot out from a moist cave and
bit the dreamer in the region of the genitals.” This dream took place at
the instant when the patient was convinced of the truth of the analysis,
and began to free himself from the bond of his mother complex. The
meaning is: I am convinced that I am inspired and poisoned by the
mother. The contrary manner of expression is characteristic of the
dream. At the moment when he felt the impulse to go forwards he
perceived the attachment to the mother. Another patient had the
following dream during a relapse, in which the libido was again wholly
introverted for a time: “She was entirely filled within by a great
snake; only one end of the tail peeped out from her arm. She wanted to
seize it, but it escaped her.” A patient with a very strong introversion
(catatonic state) complained to me that a snake was stuck in her
throat.[759] This symbolism is also used by Nietzsche in the “vision” of
the shepherd and the snake:[760]

  “And verily, what I saw was like nothing I ever saw before. I saw a
  young shepherd, writhing, choking, twitching with a convulsed face,
  from whose mouth hung a black, heavy serpent.

  “Did I ever see so much disgust and pallid fear upon a
  countenance?[761] Might he have been sleeping, and the snake crept
  into his mouth—there it bit him fast?

  “My hand tore at the serpent and tore—in vain!—I failed to tear the
  serpent out of his mouth. Then there cried out of me: ‘Bite! Bite! Its
  head off! Bite!’ I exclaimed; all my horror, my hate, my disgust, my
  compassion, all the good and bad cried out from me in one voice.

  “Ye intrepid ones around me! solve for me the riddle which I saw, make
  clear to me the vision of the lonesomest one.

  “For it was a vision and a prophecy; what did then I behold in
  parable? And who is it who is still to come?

  “Who is the shepherd into whose mouth crept the snake? Who is the man
  into whose throat all the heaviness and the blackest would creep?[762]

  “But the shepherd bit, as my cry had told him; he bit with a huge
  bite! Far away did he spit the head of the serpent—and sprang up.

  “No longer shepherd, no longer man, a transfigured being, an
  illuminated being, who laughed! Never yet on earth did a man laugh as
  he laughed!

  “O my brethren, I heard a laugh which was no human laughter—and now a
  thirst consumeth me, a longing that is never allayed.

  “My longing for this laugh eats into me. Oh, how can I suffer still to
  live! And how now can I bear to die!”[763]

The snake represents the introverting libido. Through introversion one
is fertilized, inspired, regenerated and reborn from the God. In Hindoo
philosophy this idea of creative, intellectual activity has even
cosmogenic significance. The unknown original creator of all things is,
according to Rigveda 10, 121, Prajâpati, the “Lord of Creation.” In the
various Brahmas, his cosmogenic activity was depicted in the following
manner

  “Prajâpati desired: ‘I will procreate myself, I will be manifold.’ He
  performed Tapas; after he had performed Tapas he created these
  worlds.”

The strange conception of Tapas is to be translated, according to
Deussen,[764] as “he heated himself with his own heat,[765] with the
sense of ‘he brooded, he hatched.’” Here the hatcher and the hatched are
not two, but one and the same identical being. As Hiranyagarbha,
Prajâpati is the egg produced from himself, the world-egg, from which he
hatches himself. He creeps into himself, he becomes his own uterus,
becomes pregnant with himself, in order to give birth to the world of
multiplicity. Thus Prajâpati through the way of introversion changed
into something new, the multiplicity of the world. It is of especial
interest to note how the most remote things come into contact. Deussen
observes:

  “In the degree that the conception of Tapas (heat) becomes in hot
  India the symbol of exertion and distress, the ‘tapo atapyata’ began
  to assume the meaning of self-castigation and became related to the
  idea that creation is an act of _self-renunciation_ on the part of the
  Creator.”

Self-incubation and self-castigation and introversion are very closely
connected ideas.[766] The Zosimos vision mentioned above betrays the
same train of thought, where it is said of the place of transformation:
ὁ τόπος τῆς ἀσκήσεως.[767] We have already observed that the place of
transformation is really the uterus. Absorption in one’s self
(introversion) is an entrance into one’s own uterus, and also at the
same time asceticism. In the philosophy of the Brahmans the world arose
from this activity; among the post-Christian Gnostics it produced the
revival and spiritual rebirth of the individual, who was born into a new
spiritual world. The Hindoo philosophy is considerably more daring and
logical, and assumes that creation results from introversion in general,
as in the wonderful hymn of Rigveda, 10, 29, it is said:

        “What was hidden in the shell,
        Was born through the power of fiery torments.
        From this first arose love,
        As the germ of knowledge,
        The wise found the roots of existence in non-existence,
        By investigating the hearts impulses.”[768]

This philosophical view interprets the world as an emanation of the
libido, and this must be widely accepted from the theoretic as well as
the psychologic standpoint, for the function of reality is an
instinctive function, having the character of biological adaptation.
When the insane Schreber brought about the end of the world through his
libido-introversion, he expressed an entirely rational psychologic view,
just as Schopenhauer wished to abolish through negation (holiness,
asceticism) the error of the primal will, through which the world was
created. Does not Goethe say:

                 “You follow a false trail;
                 Do not think that we are not serious;
                 Is not the kernel of nature
                 In the hearts of men?”

The hero, who is to accomplish the rejuvenation of the world and the
conquest of death, is the libido, which, brooding upon itself in
introversion, coiling as a snake around its own egg, apparently
threatens life with a poisonous bite, in order to lead it to death, and
from that darkness, conquering itself, gives birth to itself again.
Nietzsche knows this conception:[769]

          “How long have you sat already upon your misfortune.
          Give heed! lest you hatch an egg,
          A basilisk egg
          Of your long travail.”

The hero is himself a serpent, himself a sacrificer and a sacrificed.
The hero himself is of _serpent nature_; therefore, Christ compares
himself with the serpent; therefore, the redeeming principle of the
world of that Gnostic sect which styled itself the Ophite was the
serpent. The serpent is the Agatho and Kako demon. It is, indeed,
intelligible, when, in the Germanic saga, they say that the heroes had
serpents’ eyes.[770] I recall the parallel previously drawn between the
eyes of the Son of man and those of the Tarpeian dragon. In the already
mentioned mediæval pictures, the dragon, instead of the Lord, appeared
in the cup; the dragon who with changeful, serpent glances[771] guarded
the divine mystery of renewed rebirth in the maternal womb. In Nietzsche
the old, apparently long extinct idea is again revived:[772]

           “Ailing with tenderness, just as the thawing wind,
           Zarathustra sits waiting, waiting on his hill,
           Sweetened and cooked in his own juice,
           Beneath his summits,
           Beneath his ice he sits,
           Weary and happy,
           A Creator on his seventh day.
           Silence!
           It is my truth!
           From hesitating eyes—
           From velvety shadows
           Her glance meets mine,
           Lovely, mischievous, the glance of a girl.
           She divines the reason of my happiness,
           She divines me—ha! what is she plotting?
           A purple dragon lurks
           In the abyss of her maiden glance.[773]
           Woe to thee, Zarathustra,
           Thou seemest like some one
           Who has swallowed gold,
           Thy belly will be slit open.”[774]

In this poem nearly all the symbolism is collected which we have
elaborated previously from other connections. Distinct traces of the
primitive identity of serpent and hero are still extant in the myth of
Cecrops. Cecrops is himself half-snake, half-man. Originally, he
probably was the Athenian snake of the citadel itself. As a buried god,
he is like Erechtheus, a chthonic snake god. Above his subterranean
dwelling rises the Parthenon, the temple of the virgin goddess (compare
the analogous idea of the Christian church). The casting of the skin of
the god, which we have already mentioned in passing, stands in the
closest relation to the nature of the hero. We have spoken already of
the Mexican god who casts his skin. It is also told of Mani, the founder
of the Manichaean sect, that he was killed, skinned, stuffed and hung
up.[775] That is the death of Christ, merely in another mythological
form.[776]

Marsyas, who seems to be a substitute for Attis, the son-lover of
Cybele, was also skinned.[777] Whenever a Scythian king died, slaves and
horses were slaughtered, skinned and stuffed, and then set up
again.[778] In Phrygia, the representatives of the father-god were
killed and skinned. The same was done in Athens with an ox, who was
skinned and stuffed and again hitched to the plough.

In this manner the revival of the fertility of the earth was
celebrated.[779]

This readily explains the fragment from the Sabazios mysteries,
transmitted to us by Firmicus:[780] Ταῦρος δράκοντος καὶ πατὴρ ταύρου
δράκων[781].

The active fructifying (upward striving) form of the libido is changed
into the negative force striving downwards towards death. The hero as
zodion of spring (ram, bull) conquers the depths of winter; and beyond
the summer solstice is attacked by the unconscious longing for death,
and is bitten by the snake. However, he himself is the snake. But he is
at war with himself, and, therefore, the descent and the end appear to
him as the malicious inventions of the mother of death, who in this way
wishes to draw him to herself. The mysteries, however, consolingly
promise that there is no contradiction[782] or disharmony when life is
changed into death: ταῦρος δράκοντος καὶ πατήρ ταύρου δράκων.

Nietzsche, too, gives expression to this mystery:[783]

               “_Here do I sit now_,
               That is, I’m swallowed down
               By this the smallest oasis—
               —It opened up just yawning,
               Its loveliest maw agape.
               Hail! hail! to that whalefish,
               When he for his guests’ welfare
               Provided thus!

                      ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

               Hail to his belly
               If he had also
               Such a lovely oasis belly—
               The desert grows, woe to him
               Who hides the desert!
               Stone grinds on stone, the desert
               Gulps and strangles.
               The monstrous death gazes, glowing brown,
               And chews—his life is his chewing ...
               Forget not, O man, burnt out by lust,
               Thou art the stone, the desert,
               Thou art death!”

The serpent symbolism of the Last Supper is explained by the
identification of the hero with the serpent: The god is buried in the
mother: as fruit of the field, as food coming from the mother and at the
same time as drink of immortality he is received by the mystic, or as a
serpent he unites with the mystic. All these symbols represent the
liberation of the libido from the incestuous fixation through which new
life is attained. The liberation is accomplished under symbols, which
represent the activity of the incest wish.

It might be justifiable at this place to cast a glance upon
psychoanalysis as a method of treatment. In practical analysis it is
important, first of all, to discover the libido lost from the control of
consciousness. (It often happens to the libido as with the fish of Moses
in the Mohammedan legend; it sometimes “takes its course in a marvellous
manner into the sea.”) Freud says in his important article, “Zur Dynamik
der Übertragung”:[784]

  “The libido has retreated into regression and again revives the
  infantile images.”

This means, mythologically, that the sun is devoured by the serpent of
the night, the treasure is concealed and guarded by the dragon:
substitution of a present mode of adaptation by an infantile mode, which
is represented by the corresponding neurotic symptoms. Freud continues:

  “Thither the analytic treatment follows it and endeavors to seek out
  the libido again, to render it accessible to consciousness, and
  finally to make it serviceable to reality. Whenever the analytic
  investigation touches upon the libido, withdrawn into its
  hiding-place, a struggle must break out; all the forces, which have
  caused the regression of the libido, will rise up as resistance
  against the work, in order to preserve this new condition.”

Mythologically this means: the hero seeks the lost sun, the fire, the
virgin sacrifice, or the treasure, and fights the typical fight with the
dragon, with the libido in resistance. As these parallels show,
psychoanalysis mobiles a part of the life processes, the fundamental
importance of which properly illustrates the significance of this
process.

After Siegfried has slain the dragon, he meets the father, Wotan,
plagued by gloomy cares, for the primitive mother, Erda, has placed in
his path the snake, in order to enfeeble his sun. He says to Erda:

               _Wanderer_:

               All-wise one,
               Care’s piercing sting by thee was planted
               In Wotan’s dauntless heart
               With fear of shameful ruin and downfall.
               Filled was his spirit by tidings
               Thou didst foretell.
               Art thou the world’s wisest of women?
               Tell to me now
               How a god may conquer his care.

               _Erda_:

               Thou art not
               What thou hast said.

It is the same primitive motive which we meet Wagner: the mother has
robbed her son, the sun-god, of the joy of life, through a poisonous
thorn, and deprives him of his power, which is connected with the name.
Isis demands the name of the god; Erda says, “Thou art not what thou
hast said.” But the “Wanderer” has found the way to conquer the fatal
charm of the mother, the fear of death:

                  “The eternals’ downfall
                  No more dismays me,
                  Since their doom I willed.

                  “I leave to thee, loveliest Wälsung,
                  Gladly my heritage now.
                  To the ever-young
                  In gladness yieldeth the god!”

These wise words contain, in fact, the saving thought. It is not the
mother who has placed the poisonous worm in our path, but our libido
itself wills to complete the course of the sun to mount from morn to
noon, and, passing beyond noon, to hasten towards evening, not at war
with itself, but willing the descent and the end.[785]

Nietzsche’s Zarathustra teaches:

  “I praise thee, my death, the free death, which comes to me because I
  want it.

  “And when shall I want it?

  “He who has a goal and an heir wants death at the proper time for his
  goal and his heir.

  “And this is the great noonday, when man in the middle of his course
  stands between man and superman, and celebrates his path towards
  evening as his highest hope: because it is the path to a new morning.

  “He who is setting will bless his own going down because it is a
  transition: and the sun of his knowledge will be at high noon.”

Siegfried conquers the father Wotan and takes possession of Brunhilde.
The first object that he sees is her horse; then he believes that he
beholds a mail-clad man. He cuts to pieces the protecting coat of mail
of the sleeper. (Overpowering.) When he sees it is a woman, terror
seizes him:

                  “My heart doth falter and faint;
                  On whom shall I call
                  That he may help me?
                  Mother! Mother!
                  Remember me!

                  “Can this be fearing?
                  Oh, mother! Mother!
                  Thy dauntless child!
                  A woman lieth asleep:—
                  And she now has taught him to fear!

                  “Awaken! Awaken!
                  Holiest maid!
                  Then life from the sweetness of lips
                  Will I win me—
                  E’en tho’ I die in a kiss.”

In the duet which follows the mother is invoked:

                       “O mother, hail!
                       Who gave thee thy birth!”

The confession of Brunhilde is especially characteristic:

                   “O knewest thou—joy of the world,
                   How I have ever loved thee!
                   Thou wert my gladness,
                   My care wert thou!
                   Thy life I sheltered;
                   Or ere it was thine,
                   Or ere thou wert born,
                   My shield was thy guard.”[786]

The pre-existence of the hero and the pre-existence of Brunhilde as his
wife-mother are clearly indicated from this passage.

Siegfried says in confirmation:

                    “Then death took not my mother?
                    Bound in sleep did she lie?”

The mother-imago, which is the symbol of the dying and resurrected
libido, is explained by Brunhilde to the hero, as his own will:

                      “Thyself am I
                      If blest I be in thy love.”

The great mystery of the Logos entering into the mother for rebirth is
proclaimed with the following words by Brunhilde:

                   “O Siegfried, Siegfried,
                   Conquering light!
                   I loved thee ever,
                   For I divined
                   The thought that Wotan had hidden—
                   The thought that I dared
                   Not to whisper—[787]
                   That all unclearly
                   Glowed in my bosom
                   Suffered and strove;
                   For which I flouted
                   Him, who conceived it:[787]
                   For which in penance
                   Prisoned I lay,
                   While thinking it not
                   And feeling only,
                   For, in my thought,
                   Oh, should you guess it?
                   Was only my love for thee.”

The erotic similes which now follow distinctly reveal the motive of
rebirth:

                   _Siegfried_:
                     “A glorious flood
                     Before me rolls.
                     With all my senses
                     I only see
                     Its buoyant, gladdening billows.
                     Though in the deep
                     I find not my face,
                     Burning, I long
                     For the water’s balm;
                     And now as I am,
                     Spring in the stream.[788]
                     O might its billows
                     Engulf me in bliss.”

The motive of plunging into the maternal water of rebirth (baptism) is
here fully developed. An allusion to the “terrible mother” imago, the
mother of heroes, who teaches them fear, is to be found in Brunhilde’s
words (the horse-woman, who guides the dead to the other side):

                       “Fearest thou, Siegfried?
                       Fearest thou not
                       The wild, furious woman?”

The orgiastic “Occide moriturus” resounds in Brunhilde’s words:

                      “Laughing let us be lost—
                      Laughing go down to death!”

And in the words

                          “Light-giving love,
                          Laughing death!”

is to be found the same significant contrast.

The further destinies of Siegfried are those of the Invictus: the spear
of the gloomy, one-eyed Hagen strikes Siegfried’s vulnerable spot. The
old sun, who has become the god of death, the one-eyed Wotan, smites his
offspring, and once again ascends in eternal rejuvenation. The course of
the invincible sun has supplied the mystery of human life with beautiful
and imperishable symbols; it became a comforting fulfilment of all the
yearning for immortality, of all desire of mortals for eternal life.

Man leaves the mother, the source of libido, and is driven by the
eternal thirst to find her again, and to drink renewal from her; thus he
completes his cycle, and returns again into the mother’s womb. Every
obstacle which obstructs his life’s path, and threatens his ascent,
wears the shadowy features of the “terrible mother,” who paralyzes his
energy with the consuming poison of the stealthy, retrospective longing.
In each conquest he wins again the smiling love and life-giving
mother—images which belong to the intuitive depths of human feeling, the
features of which have become mutilated and irrecognizable through the
progressive development of the surface of the human mind. The stern
necessity of adaptation works ceaselessly to obliterate the last traces
of these primitive landmarks of the period of the origin of the human
mind, and to replace them along lines which are to denote more and more
clearly the nature of real objects.




                              CHAPTER VIII
                             THE SACRIFICE


After this long digression, let us return to Miss Miller’s vision. We
can now answer the question as to the significance of Siegfried’s
longing for Brunhilde. It is the striving of the libido away _from the
mother towards the mother_. This paradoxical sentence may be translated
as follows: as long as the libido is satisfied merely with phantasies,
it moves in itself, in its own depths, in the mother.[789] When the
longing of our author rises in order to escape the magic circle of the
incestuous and, therefore, pernicious, object, and it does not succeed
in finding reality, then the object is and remains irrevocably the
mother. Only the overcoming of the obstacles of reality brings the
deliverance from the mother, who is the continuous and inexhaustible
source of life for the creator, but death for the cowardly, timid and
sluggish.

Whoever is acquainted with psychoanalysis knows how often neurotics cry
out against their parents. To be sure, such complaints and reproaches
are often justified on account of the common human imperfections, but
still more often they are reproaches which should really be directed
towards themselves. Reproach and hatred are always futile attempts to
free one’s self apparently from the parents, but in reality from one’s
own hindering longing for the parents. Our author proclaims through the
mouth of her infantile hero Chiwantopel a series of insults against her
own family. We can assume that she must renounce all these tendencies,
because they contain an unrecognized wish. This hero, of many words, who
performs few deeds and indulges in futile yearnings, is the libido which
has not fulfilled its destiny, but which turns round and round in the
kingdom of the mother, and, in spite of all its longing, accomplishes
nothing. Only he can break this magic circle who possesses the courage
of the will to live and the heroism to carry it through. Could this
yearning hero-youth, Chiwantopel, but put an end to his existence, he
would probably rise again in the form of a brave man seeking real life.
This necessity imposes itself upon the dreamer as a wise counsel and
hint of the unconscious in the following monologue of Chiwantopel. He
cries sadly:

  “In all the world, there is not a single one! I have sought among a
  hundred tribes. I have watched a hundred moons, since I began. Can it
  be that there is not a solitary being who will ever know my soul? Yes,
  by the sovereign God, yes! But ten thousand moons will wax and wane
  before that pure soul is born. And it is from another world that her
  parents will come to this one. She will have pale skin and pale locks.
  She will know sorrow before her mother bears her. Suffering will
  accompany her; she will seek also, and she will find, no one who
  understands her. Temptation will often assail her soul—but she will
  not yield. In her dreams, I will come to her, and she will understand.
  _I have kept my body inviolate._ I have come ten thousand moons before
  her epoch, and she will come ten thousand moons too late. But she will
  understand! There is only once in all the ten thousand moons that a
  soul like hers is born.”

Thereupon a green _serpent darts from the bushes, glides towards him and
stings him on the arm, then attacks the horse, which succumbs first_.
Then Chiwantopel says to his horse:

  “‘Adieu, faithful brother! Enter into rest! I have loved you, and you
  have served me well. Adieu. Soon I will rejoin you!’ Then to the
  snake: ‘Thanks, little sister, you have _put an end to my
  wanderings_.’”

Then he cried with grief and spoke his prayer:

  “‘Sovereign God, take me soon! I have tried to know thee, and to keep
  thy law! O, do not suffer my body to fall into corruption and decay,
  and to furnish the vultures with food!’ A smoking crater is perceived
  at a distance, the rumbling of an earthquake is heard, followed by a
  trembling of the ground.”

Chiwantopel cries in the delirium of suffering, while the earth covers
his body:

  “I have kept my body inviolate. Ah! She understands. Ja-ni-wa-ma,
  Ja-ni-wa-ma, thou who comprehendeth me.”

Chiwantopel’s prophecy is a repetition of Longfellow’s “Hiawatha,” where
the poet could not escape sentimentality, and at the close of the career
of the hero, Hiawatha, he brings in the Savior of the white people, in
the guise of the arriving illustrious representatives of the Christian
religion and morals. (One thinks of the work of redemption of the
Spaniards in Mexico and Peru!) With this prophecy of Chiwantopel, the
personality of the author is again placed in the closest relation to the
hero, and, indeed, as the real object of Chiwantopel’s longing. Most
certainly the hero would have married her, had she lived at his time;
but, unfortunately, she comes too late. The connection proves our
previous assertion that the libido moves round in a circle. The author
loves herself; that is to say, she, as the hero, is sought by one who
comes too late. This motive of coming too late is characteristic of the
infantile love: the father and the mother cannot be overtaken. The
separation of the two personalities by ten thousand moons is a wish
fulfilment; with that the incest relation is annulled in an effectual
manner. This white heroine will seek without being understood. (She is
not understood, because she cannot understand herself rightly.) And she
will not find. But in dreams, at least, they will find each other, “and
she will understand.” The next sentence of the text reads:

  “I have kept my body inviolate.”

This proud sentence, which naturally only a woman can express, because
man is not accustomed to boast in that direction, again confirms the
fact that all enterprises have remained but dreams, that the body has
remained “inviolate.” When the hero visits the heroine in a dream, it is
clear what is meant. This assertion of the hero’s, that he has remained
inviolate, refers back to the unsuccessful attempt upon his life in the
previous chapter (huntsman with the arrow), and clearly explains to us
what was really meant by this assault; that is to say, the refusal of
the coitus phantasy. Here the wish of the unconscious obtrudes itself
again, after the hero had repressed it the first time, and thereupon he
painfully and hysterically utters this monologue. “Temptation will often
assail her soul—but it will not yield.” This very bold assertion
reduces—noblesse oblige—the unconscious to an enormous infantile
megalomania, which is always the case when the libido is compelled,
through similar circumstances, to regressions. “Only once in all the ten
thousand moons is a soul born like mine!” Here the unconscious ego
expands to an enormous degree, evidently in order to cover with its
boastfulness a large part of the neglected duty of life. But punishment
follows at its heels. Whoever prides himself too much on having
sustained no wound in the battle of life lays himself open to the
suspicion that his fighting has been with words only, whilst actually he
has remained far away from the firing-line. This spirit is just the
reverse of the pride of those savage women, who point with satisfaction
to the countless scars which were given them by their men in the sexual
fight for supremacy. In accordance with this, and in logical
continuation of the same, all that follows is expressed in figurative
speech. The orgiastic “Occide moriturus” in its admixture with the
reckless laughter of the Dionysian frenzy confronts us here in sorry
disguise with a sentimental stage trickery worthy of our posthumous
edition of “Christian morals.” In place of the positive phallus, the
negative appears, and leads the hero’s horse (his libido animalis), not
to satisfaction, but into eternal peace—also the fate of the hero. This
end means that the mother, represented as the jaws of death, devours the
libido of the daughter. Therefore, instead of life and procreative
growth, only phantastic self-oblivion results. This weak and inglorious
end has no elevating or illuminating meaning so long as we consider it
merely as the solution of an individual erotic conflict. The fact that
the symbols under which the solution takes place have actually a
significant aspect, reveals to us that behind the individual mask,
behind the veil of “individuation,” a primitive idea stands, the severe
and serious features of which take from us the courage to consider the
sexual meaning of the Miller symbolism as all-sufficient.

It is not to be forgotten that the _sexual phantasies of the neurotic
and the exquisite sexual language of dreams_ are regressive phenomena.
The sexuality of the unconscious is not what it seems to be; _it is
merely a symbol_; it is a thought bright as day, clear as sunlight, a
decision, a step forward to every goal of life—but expressed in the
unreal sexual language of the unconscious, and in the thought form of an
earlier stage; a resurrection, so to speak, of earlier modes of
adaptation. When, therefore, the unconscious pushes into the foreground
the coitus wish, negatively expressed, it means somewhat as follows:
under similar circumstances primitive man acted in such and such a
manner. The mode of adaptation which to-day is unconscious for us is
carried on by the savage Negro of the present day, whose undertakings
beyond those of nutrition appertain to sexuality, characterized by
violence and cruelty. Therefore, in view of the archaic mode of
expression of the Miller phantasy, we are justified in assuming the
correctness of our interpretation for the lowest and nearest plane only.
A deeper stratum of meaning underlies the earlier assertion that the
figure of Chiwantopel has the character of Cassius, who has a lamb as a
companion. Therefore, Chiwantopel is the portion of the dreamer’s libido
bound up with the mother (and, therefore, masculine); hence he is her
infantile personality, the childishness of character, which as yet is
unable to understand that one must leave father and mother, when the
time is come, in order to serve the destiny of the entire personality.
This is outlined in Nietzsche’s words:

  “Free dost thou call thyself? Thy dominant thought would I hear and
  not that thou hast thrown off a yoke. Art thou one who had the right
  to throw off a yoke? There are many who throw away their last value
  when they throw away their servitude.”

Therefore, when Chiwantopel dies, it means that herein is a fulfilment
of a wish, that this infantile hero, who cannot leave the mother’s care,
may die. And if with that the bond between mother and daughter is
severed, a great step forward is gained both for inner and outer
freedom. But man wishes to remain a child too long; he would fain stop
the turning of the wheel, which, rolling, bears along with it the years;
man wishes to keep his childhood and eternal youth, rather than to die
and suffer corruption in the grave. (“O, do not suffer my body to fall
into decay and corruption.”) Nothing brings the relentless flight of
time and the cruel perishability of all blossoms more painfully to our
consciousness than an inactive and empty life. _Idle dreaming is the
mother of the fear of death_, the sentimental deploring of what has been
and the vain turning back of the clock. Although man can forget in the
long- (perhaps too long) guarded feelings of youth, in the dreamy state
of stubbornly held remembrances, that the wheel rolls onward,
nevertheless mercilessly does the gray hair, the relaxation of the skin
and the wrinkles in the face tell us, that whether or not we expose the
body to the destroying powers of the whole struggle of life, the poison
of the stealthily creeping serpent of time consumes our bodies, which,
alas! we so dearly love. Nor does it help if we cry out with the
melancholy hero Chiwantopel, “I have kept my body inviolate”; flight
from life does not free us from the law of age and death. The neurotic
who seeks to get rid of the necessities of life wins nothing and lays
upon himself the frightful burden of a premature age and death, which
must appear especially cruel on account of the total emptiness and
meaninglessness of his life. If the libido is not permitted to follow
the progressive life, which is willing to accept all dangers and all
losses, then it follows the other road, sinking into its own depths,
working down into the old foreboding regarding the immortality of all
life, to the longing for rebirth.

Hölderlin exemplifies this path in his poetry and his life. I leave the
poet to speak in his song:

                             _To the Rose._

                 “In the Mother-womb eternal,
                   Sweetest queen of every lea,
                 Still the living and supernal
                   Nature carries thee and me.

                 “Little rose, the storm’s fierce power
                   Strips our leaves and alters us;
                 Yet the deathless germ will tower
                   To new blooms, miraculous.”

The following comments may be made upon the parable of this poem: The
rose is the symbol of the beloved woman (“Haidenröslein,” heather rose
of Goethe). The rose blooms in the “rose-garden” of the maiden;
therefore, it is also a direct symbol of the libido. When the poet
dreams that he is with the rose in the mother-womb of nature, then,
psychologically, the fact is that his libido is with the mother. Here is
an eternal germination and renewal. We have come across this motive
already in the Hierosgamos hymn (Iliad XIV): The nuptials in the blessed
West; that is to say, the union in and with the mother. Plutarch shows
us this motive in naïve form in his tradition of the Osiris myth; Osiris
and Isis copulating in the mother’s womb. This is also perceived by
Hölderlin as the enviable prerogative of the gods—to enjoy everlasting
infancy. Thus, in Hyperion, he says:

                 “Fateless, like the sleeping nursling,
                 Breathe the Heavenly ones;
                 Chastely guarded in modest buds,
                 Their spirits blossom eternally,
                 And their quiet eyes
                 Gaze out in placid
                 Eternal serenity.”

This quotation shows the meaning of heavenly bliss. Hölderlin never was
able to forget this first and greatest happiness, the dreamy picture of
which estranged him from real life. Moreover, in this poem, the ancient
_motive of the twins_ in the mother’s womb is intimated. (Isis and
Osiris in the mother’s womb.) The motive is archaic. There is a legend
in Frobenius of how the great serpent (appearing from the little serpent
in the hollow tree, through the so-called stretching out of the serpent)
has finally devoured all men (devouring mother—death), and only a
pregnant woman remains alive; she digs a ditch, covers it with a stone
(grave—mother’s womb), and, living there, she gives birth to twins, the
subsequent dragon-killers (the hero in double form, man and phallus, man
and woman, man with his libido, the dying and rising sun).

This existence together in the mother is to be found also very
beautifully expressed in an African myth (Frobenius):

  “In the beginning, Obatala, the heaven, and Odudua, the earth, his
  wife, lay pressed firmly together in a calabas.”

The guarding “in a modest bud” is an idea which has appeared already in
Plutarch, where it is said that the sun was born in the morning from a
flower bud. Brahma, too, comes from the bud, which also gave birth in
Assam to the first human pair.

                          _Humanity._

                        (An unfinished poem.)

  “Scarcely sprouted from the waters, O Earth,
  Are thy old mountain tops and diffuse odors,
  While the first green islands, full of young woods, breathe delight
  Through the May air over the Ocean.

  “And joyfully the eye of the Sun-god looked down
  Upon the firstlings of the trees and flowers;
  Laughing children of his youth, born from thee;
  When on the fairest of the islands....

         ·       ·       ·       ·       ·
  Once lay thy most beautiful child under the grapes;
  Lay after a mild night; in the dawn,
  In the daybreak a child born to thee, O Earth!
  And the boy looks up familiarly
  To his Father, Helios,
  And, tasting the sweet grapes,
  He picked the sacred vine for his nurse,
  And soon he is grown; the beasts
  Fear him, for he is different from them:
  This man; he is not like thee, the father,
  For the lofty soul of the father,
  Is in him boldly united with thy pleasures,
  And thy sadness, O Earth,
  He may resemble the eternal Nature,
  The mother of Gods, the terrible Mother.

  “Ah! therefore, O Earth,
  His presumption drives him away from thy breast,
  And thy gifts are vain, the tender ones;
  Ever and ever too high does the proud heart beat.

  “Out from the sweet meadow of his shores
  Man must go into the flowerless waters,
  And tho his groves shine with golden fruit,
  Like the starry night, yet he digs,
  He digs caves in the mountains, and seeks in the mines,
  Far from the sacred rays of his father,
  Faithless also to the Sun-god,
  Who does not love weaklings, and mocks at cares.

  “Ah! freer do the birds of the wood breathe:
  Although the breast of man heaves wilder and more proudly,
  His pride becomes fear, and the tender flowers
  Of his peace do not bloom for long.”

This poem betrays to us the beginning of the discord between the poet
and nature; he begins to be estranged from reality, the natural actual
existence. It is a remarkable idea how the little child chooses “the
vine for his nurse.” This Dionysian allusion is very old. In the
significant blessing of Jacob it is said of Judah (Genesis, chap. xlix,
verse 11):

  “Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass’s colt unto the choice
  vine.”

A Gnostic gem has been preserved upon which there is a representation of
an ass suckling her foal, above which is the symbol of Cancer, and the
circumscription D.N.I.H.Y.X.P.S.: Dominus Noster Jesus Christus, with
the supplement Dei filius. As Justinus Martyr indignantly observes, the
connections of the Christian legend with that of Dionysus are
unmistakable. (Compare, for example, the miracle of the wine.) In the
last-named legend the ass plays an important rôle. Generally speaking,
the ass has an entirely different meaning in the Mediterranean countries
than with us—an economic one. Therefore, it is a benediction when Jacob
says (Genesis, chap. xlix, verse 14):

  “Issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens.”

The above-mentioned thought is altogether Oriental. Just as in Egypt the
new-born sun is a bull-calf, in the rest of the Orient it can easily be
an ass’s foal, to whom the vine is the nurse. Hence the picture in the
blessing of Jacob, where it is said of Judah:

  “His eyes are ruddy with wine and his teeth white with milk.”

The mock crucifix of the Palatine, with an ass’s head, evidently alludes
to a very significant background.

                         _To Nature._

         “While about thy veil I lingered, playing,
           And, like any bud, upon thee hung,[790]
         Still I felt thy heart in every straying
           Sound about my heart that shook and clung.
         While I groped with faith and painful yearning,
           To your picture, glowing and unfurled,
         Still I found a place for all my burning
           Tears, and for my love I found a world!

         “To the Sun my heart, before all others,
           Turned and felt its potent magicry;
         And it called the stars its little brothers,[791]
           And it called the Spring, God’s melody;
         And each breeze in groves or woodlands fruity
           Held thy spirit—and that same sweet joy
         Moved the well-springs of my heart with beauty—
           Those were golden days without alloy.

         “Where the Spring is cool in every valley,[792]
           And the youngest bush and twig is green,
         And about the rocks the grasses rally,
           And the branches show the sky between,
         There I lay, imbibing every flower
           In a rapt, intoxicated glee,
         And, surrounded by a golden shower,
           From their heights the clouds sank down to me.[793]

         “Often, as a weary, wandering river
           Longs to join the ocean’s placid mirth,
         I have wept and lost myself forever
           In the fulness of thy love, O Earth!
         Then—with all the ardor of my being—
           Forth I rushed from Time’s slow apathy,
         Like a pilgrim home from travel, fleeing
           To the arms of rapt Eternity.

         “_Blessed be childhood’s golden dreams, their power
           Hid from me Life’s dismal poverty_:
         _All the heart’s rich germs ye brought to flower;
           Things I could not reach, ye gave to me!_[794]
         In thy beauty and thy light, O Nature,
           Free from care and from compulsion free,
         Fruitful Love attained a kingly stature,
           Rich as harvests reaped in Arcady.

         “That which brought me up, is dead and riven,
           Dead the youthful world which was my shield;
         And this breast, which used to harbor heaven,
           Dead and dry as any stubble-field.
         Still my Springlike sorrows sing and cover
           With their friendly comfort every smart—
         But the morning of my life is over
           And the Spring has faded from my heart....

         “Shadows are the things that once we cherished;
           Love itself must fade and cannot bide;
         Since the golden dreams of youth have perished,
           Even friendly Nature’s self has died.
         Heart, poor heart, those days could never show it—
           How far-off thy home, and where it lies ...
         Now, alas, thou nevermore wilt know it
           If a dream of it does not suffice.”

                            _Palinodia._

    “What gathers about me, Earth, in your dusky, friendly green?
    What are you blowing towards me, Winds, what do you bring again?
    There is a rustling in all the tree-tops....

           ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

    “Why do you wake my soul?
    Why do ye stir in me the past, ye Kind ones?
    Oh, spare me, and let them rest; oh, do not mock
    Those ashes of my joy....

    “O change your changeless gods—
    And grow in your youth over the old ones.
    And if you would be akin to the mortals
    The young girls will blossom for you.
    And the young heroes will shine;
    And, sweeter than ever,
    Morning will play upon the cheeks of the happy ones;
    And, ravishing-sweet, you will hear
    The songs of those who are without care....

    “Ah, once the living waves of song
    Surged out of every bush to me;
    And still the heavenly ones glanced down upon me,
    Their eyes shining with joy.”

           ·       ·       ·       ·       ·


The separation from the blessedness of childhood, from youth even, has
taken the golden glamour from nature, and the future is hopeless
emptiness. But what robs nature of its glamour, and life of its joy, is
the poison of the retrospective longing, which harks back, in order to
sink into its own depths:

                              _Empedocles._

          “Thou seekest life—and a godly fire springs to thee,
          Gushing and gleaming, from the deeps of the earth;
          And, with shuddering longing,
          Throws thee down into the flames of Aetna.

          “So, through a queen’s wanton whim,
          Pearls are dissolved in wine—restrain her not!
          Didst thou not throw thy riches, Poet,
          Into the bright and bubbling cup!

          “Still thou art holy to me, as the Power of Earth
          Which took thee away, lovely assassin!...
          And I would have followed the hero to the depths,
          Had Love not held me.”

This poem betrays the secret longing for the maternal depths.[795]

He would like to be sacrificed in the chalice, dissolved in wine like
pearls (the “crater” of rebirth), yet love holds him within the light of
day. The libido still has an object, for the sake of which life is worth
living. But were this object abandoned, then the libido would sink into
the realm of the subterranean, the mother, who brings forth again:

                             _Obituary._

                         (Unfinished poem.)

 “Daily I go a different path.
 Sometimes into the green wood, sometimes to the bath in the spring;
 Or to the rocks where the roses bloom.
 From the top of the hill I look over the land,
 Yet nowhere, thou lovely one, nowhere in the light do I find thee;
 And in the breezes my words die away,
 The sacred words which once we had.

 “Aye, thou art far away, O holy countenance!
 And the melody of thy life is kept from me,
 No longer overheard. And, ah, where are
 Thy magic songs which once soothed my heart
 With the peace of Heaven?
 How long it is, how long!
 The youth is aged; the very earth itself, which once smiled on me,
 Has grown different.

 “Oh, farewell! The soul of every day departs, and, departing, turns to
    thee—
 And over thee there weeps
 The eye that, becoming brighter,
 Looks down,
 There where thou tarriest.”

This distinctly suggests a renunciation, an envy of one’s own youth,
that time of freedom which one would like to retain through a
deep-rooted dislike to all duty and endeavor which is denied an
immediate pleasure reward. Painstaking work for a long time and for a
remote object is not in the nature of child or primitive man. It is
difficult to say if this can really be called laziness, but it seems to
have not a little in common with it, in so far as the psychic life on a
primitive stage, be it of an infantile or archaic type, possesses an
extreme inertia and irresponsibility in production and non-production.

The last stanza portends evil, a gazing towards the other land, the
distant coast of sunrise or sunset; love no longer holds the poet, the
bonds with the world are torn and he calls loudly for assistance to the
mother:

                         _Achilles._

 “Lordly son of the Gods! Because you lost your loved one,
 You went to the rocky coast and cried aloud to the flood,
 Till the depths of the holy abyss heard and echoed your grief,
 From the far reaches of your heart. Down, deep down, far from the clamor
    of ships,
 Deep under the waves, in a peaceful cave,
 Dwelt the beautiful Thetis, she who protected you, the Goddess of the
    Sea,
 Mother of the youth was she; the powerful Goddess,
 She who once had lovingly nursed him,
 On the rocky shore of his island; she who had made him a hero
 With the might of her strengthening bath and the powerful song of the
    waves.
 And the mother, mourning, hearkened to the cry of her child,
 And rose, like a cloud, from the bed of the sea,
 Soothing with tender embraces the pains of her darling;
 And he listened, while she, caressing, promised to soften his grief.


 “Son of the Gods! Oh, were I like you, then could I confidently
 Call on the Heavenly Ones to hearken to my secret grief.
 But never shall I see this—I shall bear the disgrace
 As if I never belonged to her, even though she thinks of me with tears.
 Beneficent Ones! And yet Ye hear the lightest prayers of men.
 Ah, how rapt and fervently I worshipped you, holy Light,
 Since I have lived, the Earth and its fountains and woodlands,
 Father Ether—and my heart has felt you about me, so ardent and pure—
 Oh, soften my sorrows, ye Kind Ones,
 That my soul may not be silenced, may not be struck dumb too early;
 That I may live and thank Ye, O Heavenly Powers,
 With joyful songs through all the hurrying days.
 Thank ye for gifts of the past, for the joys of vanished Youth—
 And then, pray, take me, the lonely one,
 Graciously, unto yourselves.”

These poems describe more plainly than could be depicted with meagre
words the persistent arrest and the constantly growing estrangement from
life, the gradual deep immersion into the maternal abyss of the
individual being. The apocalyptic song of Patmos is strangely related to
these songs of retrogressive longing. It enters as a dismal guest
surrounded by the mist of the depths, the gathering clouds of insanity,
bred through the mother. In it the primitive thoughts of the myth, the
suggestion clad in symbols, of the sun-like death and resurrection of
life, again burst forth. Similar things are to be found in abundance
among sick people of this sort.

I reproduce some significant fragments from Patmos:

                       “Near is the God
                       And hard to comprehend,
                       But where Danger threatens
                       The Rescuer appears.”

These words mean that the libido has now sunk to the lowest depths,
where “the danger is great.” (Faust, Part II, Mother scene.) There “the
God is near”; there man may find the inner sun, his own nature, sun-like
and self-renewing, hidden in the mother-womb like the sun in the
nighttime:

            “... In Chasms
            And in darkness dwell
            The eagles; and fresh and fearlessly
            The Sons of the Alps pass swiftly over the abyss
            Upon lightly swinging bridges.”

With these words the dark phantastic poem passes on. The eagle, the bird
of the sun, dwells in darkness—the libido has hidden itself, but high
above it the inhabitants of the mountains pass, probably the gods (“Ye
are walking above in the light”), symbols of the sun wandering across
the sky, like the eagle flying over the depths:

            “... Above and around are reared
            The summits of Time,
            And the loved ones, though near,
            Live on deeply separated mountains.
            So give us waters of innocence,
            And give us wings of true understanding,
            With which to pass across and to return again.”

The first is a gloomy picture of the mountains and of time—although
caused by the sun wandering over the mountains, the following picture a
nearness, and at the same time separation, of the lovers, and seems to
hint at life in the underworld,[796] where he is united with all that
once was dear to him, and yet cannot enjoy the happiness of reunion,
because it is all shadows and unreal and devoid of life. Here the one
who descends drinks the waters of innocence, the waters of childhood,
the drink of rejuvenation,[797] so wings may grow, and, winged, he may
soar up again into life, like the winged sun, which arises like a swan
from the water (“Wings, to pass across and to return again”):

              “... So I spoke, and lo, a genie
              Carried me off, swifter than I had imagined,
              And farther than ever I had thought
              From my own house!
              It grew dark
              As I went in the twilight.
              The shadowy wood,
              And the yearning brooks of my home-land
              Grew vague behind me—
              And I knew the country no longer.”

After the dark and obscure words of the introduction, wherein the poet
expresses the prophecy of what is to come, the sun journey begins
(“night journey in the sea”) towards the east, towards the ascent,
towards the mystery of eternity and rebirth, of which Nietzsche also
dreams, and which he expressed in significant words:

  “Oh, how could I not be ardent for eternity, and for the nuptial ring
  of rings—the ring of the return! Never yet have I found the woman from
  whom I wish children, unless she would be this woman whom I love; for
  I love thee, O eternity.”

Hölderlin expresses this same longing in a beautiful symbol, the
individual traits of which are already familiar to us:

          “... But soon in a fresh radiance
          Mysteriously
          Blossoming in golden smoke,
          With the rapidly growing steps of the sun,
          Making a thousand summits fragrant,
          Asia arose!
          And, dazzled,
          I sought one whom I knew;
          For unfamiliar to me were the broad roads,
          Where from Tmolus
          Comes the gilded Pactol,
          And Taurus stands and Messagis—
          And the gardens are full of flowers.
          But high up in the light
          The silvery snow gleams, a silent fire;
          And, as a symbol of eternal life,
          On the impassable walls,
          Grows the ancient ivy.[798]
          And carried by columns of living cedars and laurels
          Are the solemn, divinely built palaces.”

The symbol is apocalyptic, the maternal city in the land of eternal
youth, surrounded by the verdure and flowers of imperishable
spring.[799] The poet identifies himself here with John, who lived on
Patmos, who was once associated with “the sun of the Highest,” and saw
him face to face:

      “There at the Mystery of the Vine they met,
      There at the hour of the Holy Feast they gathered,
      And—feeling the approach of Death in his great, quiet soul,
      The Lord, pouring out his last love, spoke,
      And then he died.
      Much could be said of it—
      How his triumphant glance,
      The happiest of all,
      Was seen by his companions, even at the last.

             ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

      Therefore he sent the Spirit unto them,
      And the house trembled, solemnly;
      And, with distant thunder,
      The storm of God rolled over the cowering heads
      Where, deep in thought,
      The heroes of death were assembled....
      Now, when he, in parting,
      Appeared once more before them,
      Then the kingly day, the day of the sun, was put out,
      And the gleaming sceptre, formed of his rays,
      Was broken—and suffered like a god itself.
      Yet it shall return and glow again
      When the right time comes.”

The fundamental pictures are the sacrificial death and the resurrection
of Christ, like the self-sacrifice of the sun, which voluntarily breaks
its sceptre, the fructifying rays, in the certain hope of resurrection.
The following comments are to be noted in regard to “the sceptre of
rays”: Spielrein’s patient says, “God pierces through the earth with his
rays.” The earth, in the patient’s mind, has the meaning of woman. She
also comprehends the sunbeam in mythologic fashion as something solid:
“Jesus Christ has shown me his love, by striking against the window with
a sunbeam.” Among other insane patients I have come across the same idea
of the solid substance of the sunbeam. Here there is also a hint of the
phallic nature of the instrument which is associated with the hero.
Thor’s hammer, which, cleaving the earth, penetrates deeply into it, may
be compared to the foot of Kaineus. The hammer is retained in the
interior of the earth, like the treasure, and, in the course of time, it
gradually comes again to the surface (“the treasure blooms”), meaning
that it was born again from the earth. (Compare what has been said
concerning the etymology of “swelling.”) On many monuments Mithra holds
a peculiar object in his hands, which Cumont compares to a half-filled
tube. Dieterich proves from his papyrus text that the object is the
shoulder of the bull, the bear constellation. The shoulder has an
indirect phallic meaning, for it is the part which is wanting in Pelops.
Pelops was slaughtered by his father, Tantalus, dismembered, and boiled
in a kettle, to make a meal for the gods. Demeter had unsuspectingly
eaten the shoulder from this feast, when Zeus discovered the outrage. He
had the pieces thrown back into the kettle, and, with the help of the
life-dispensing Clotho, Pelops was regenerated, and the shoulder which
was missing was replaced by an ivory one. This substitution is a close
parallel to the substitution of the missing phallus of Osiris. Mithra is
represented in a special ceremony, holding the bull’s shoulder over Sol,
his son and vice-regent. This scene may be compared to a sort of
dedication, or accolade (something like the ceremony of confirmation).
The blow of the hammer as a generating, fructifying, inspiring function
is retained as a folk-custom and expressed by striking with the twig of
life, which has the significance of a charm of fertility. In the
neuroses, the sexual meaning of castigation plays an important part, for
among many children castigation may elicit a sexual orgasm. The ritual
act of striking has the same significance of generating (fructifying),
and is, indeed, merely a variant of the original phallic ceremonial. Of
similar character to the bull’s shoulder is the cloven hoof of the
devil, to which a sexual meaning also appertains. The ass’s jawbone
wielded by Samson has the same worth. In the Polynesian Maui myth the
jawbone, the weapon of the hero, is derived from the man-eating woman,
Muriranga-whenua, whose body swells up enormously from lusting for human
flesh (Frobenius). Hercules’ club is made from the wood of the maternal
olive tree. Faust’s key also “knows the mothers.” The libido springs
from the mother, and with this weapon alone can man overcome death.

It corresponds to the phallic nature of the ass’s jawbone, that at the
place where Samson threw it God caused a spring to gush forth[800]
(springs from the horse’s tread, footsteps, horse’s hoof). To this
relation of meanings belongs the magic wand, the sceptre in general.
Σκῆτρον belongs to σκᾶπος, σκηπάνων, σκήπων = staff; σκηπτός =
stormwind; Latin _scapus_ = shaft, stock, scapula, shoulder; Old High
German _Scaft_ = spear, lance.[801] We meet once more in this
compilation those connections which are already well known to us:
Sun-phallus as tube of the winds, lance and shoulder-blade.

The passage from Asia through Patmos to the Christian mysteries in the
poem of Hölderlin is apparently a superficial connection, but in reality
a very ingenious train of thought; namely, the entrance into death and
the land beyond as a self-sacrifice of the hero, for the attainment of
immortality. At this time, when the sun has set, when love is apparently
dead, man awaits in mysterious joy the renewal of all life:

               “... And Joy it was
               From now on
               To live in the loving night and see
               The eyes of innocence hold the unchanging
               Depths of all wisdom.”

Wisdom dwells in the depths, the wisdom of the mother: being one with
it, insight is obtained into the meaning of deeper things, into all the
deposits of primitive times, the strata of which have been preserved in
the soul. Hölderlin, in his diseased ecstasy, feels once more the
greatness of the things seen, but he does not care to bring up to the
light of day that which he had found in the depths—in this he differs
from Faust.

              “And it is not an evil, if a few
              Are lost and never found, and if the speech
              Conceals the living sound;
              Because each godly work resembles ours;
              And yet the Highest does not plan it all—
              The great pit bears two irons,
              And the glowing lava of Aetna....
              Would I had the power
              To build an image and see the Spirit—
              See it as it was!”

He allows only one hope to glimmer through, formed in scanty words:

              “He wakes the dead;
              They who are not enchained and bound,
              They who are not unwrought.
              ... And if the Heavenly Ones
              Now, as I believe, love me—
              ... Silent is his sign[802]
              In the dusky sky. And one stands under it
              His whole life long—for Christ still lives.”

But, as once Gilgamesh, bringing back the magic herb from the west land,
was robbed of his treasure by the demon serpent, so does Hölderlin’s
poem die away in a painful lament, which betrays to us that no
victorious resurrection will follow his descent to the shadows:

               “... Ignominiously
               A power tears our heart away,
               For sacrifices the heavenly ones demand.”

This recognition, that man must sacrifice the retrogressive longing (the
incestuous libido) before the “heavenly ones” tear away the sacrifice,
and at the same time the entire libido, came too late to the poet.
Therefore, I take it to be a wise counsel which the unconscious gives
our author, to sacrifice the infantile hero. This sacrifice is best
accomplished, as is shown by the most obvious meaning, through a
complete devotion to life, in which all the libido unconsciously bound
up in familial bonds, must be brought outside into human contact. For it
is necessary for the well-being of the adult individual, who in his
childhood was merely an atom revolving in a rotary system, to become
himself the centre of a new system. That such a step implies the
solution or, at least, the energetic treatment of the individual sexual
problem is obvious, for unless this is done the unemployed libido will
inexorably remain fixed in the incestuous bond, and will prevent
individual freedom in essential matters. Let us keep in mind that
Christ’s teaching separates man from his family without consideration,
and in the talk with Nicodemus we saw the specific endeavor of Christ to
procure activation of the incest libido. Both tendencies serve the same
goal—the liberation of man; the Jew from his extraordinary fixation to
the family, which does not imply higher development, but greater
weakness and more uncontrolled incestuous feeling, produced the
compensation of the compulsory ceremonial of the cult and the religious
fear of the incomprehensible Jehovah. When man, terrified by no laws and
no furious fanatics or prophets, allows his incestuous libido full play,
and does not liberate it for higher purposes, then he is under the
influence of unconscious compulsion. For compulsion is the unconscious
wish. (Freud.) He is under the dominance of the libido εἱμαρμένη[803]
and his destiny does not lie in his own hands; his adventures, Τύχαι καὶ
Μοῖραι,[804] fall from the stars. His unconscious incestuous libido,
which thus is applied in its most primitive form, fixes the man, as
regards his love type, in a corresponding primitive stage, the stage of
ungovernableness and surrender to the emotions. Such was the psychologic
situation of the passing antiquity, and the Redeemer and Physician of
that time was he who endeavored to educate man to the sublimation of the
incestuous libido.[805] The destruction of slavery was the necessary
condition of that sublimation, for antiquity had not yet recognized the
duty of work and work as a duty, as a social need of fundamental
importance. Slave labor was compulsory work, the counterpart of the
equally disastrous compulsion of the libido of the privileged. It was
only the obligation of the individual to work which made possible in the
long run that regular “drainage” of the unconscious, which was inundated
by the continual regression of the libido. Indolence is the beginning of
all vice, because in a condition of slothful dreaming the libido has
abundant opportunity for sinking into itself, in order to create
compulsory obligations by means of regressively reanimated incestuous
bonds. The best liberation is through _regular work_.[806] Work,
however, is salvation only when it is a free act, and has in itself
nothing of infantile compulsion. In this respect, religious ceremony
appears in a high degree as organized inactivity, and at the same time
as the forerunner of modern work.

Miss Miller’s vision treats the problem of the sacrifice of the
infantile longing, in the first place, as an individual problem, but if
we cast a glance at the form of this presentation, then we will become
aware that here it must concern something, which is also a problem of
humanity in general. For the symbols employed, the serpent which killed
the horse[807] and the hero voluntarily sacrificing himself, are
primitive figures of phantasies and religious myths streaming up from
the unconscious.

In so far as the world and all within it is, above all, a thought, which
is credited with transcendental “substance” through the empirical need
of the same, there results from the sacrifice of the regressive libido
the creation of the world; and, psychologically speaking, the world in
general. For him who looks backward the world, and even the infinite
starry sky, is the mother[808] who bends over and encloses him on all
sides, and from the renunciation of this idea and from the longing for
this idea arises the image of the world. From this most simple
fundamental thought, which perhaps appears strange to us only because it
is conceived according to the _principle of desire and not the principle
of reality_,[809] results the significance of the cosmic sacrifice. A
good example of this is the slaying of the Babylonian primitive mother
Tiâmat, the dragon, whose body is destined to form the heaven and the
earth. We come upon this thought in its most complete form in Hindoo
philosophy of the most ancient date; namely, in songs of Rigveda. In
Rigveda 10: 81, 4, the song inquires:

 “What was the tree, what wood in sooth produced it, from which they
    fashioned out the earth and heaven?
 Ye thoughtful men inquire within your spirit, whereon he stood when he
    established all things.”

Viçvakarman, the All-Creator, who created the world from the unknown
tree, did so as follows:

          “He who, sacrificing, entered into all these beings
          As a wise sacrificer, our Father, who,
          Striving for blessings through prayer,
          Hiding his origin,
          Entered this lowly world,
          What and who has served him
          As a resting-place and a support?”[810]

Rigveda 10: 90, gives answer to these questions. Purusha is the primal
being who

                  “... covered earth on every side and
                  Spread ten fingers’ breadth beyond.”

One sees that Purusha is a sort of Platonic world soul, who surrounds
the world from without. Of Purusha it is said:

                  “Being born he overtopped the earth
                  Before, behind, and in all places.”

The mother symbolism is plain, it seems to me, in the idea of Purusha.
He represents the mother-imago and the libido of the child clinging to
her. From this assumption all that follows is very easily explained:

               “As sacrificial animal on the bed of straw
               Was dedicated the Purusha,
               Who was born on the straw,
               Whom the Gods, the Blest, and the Wise,
               Meeting there, sacrificed.”

This verse is very remarkable; if one wishes to stretch this mythology
out on the procrustean bed of logic, sore violence would have to be
committed. It is an incredibly phantastic conception that, beside the
gods, ordinary “wise men” unite in sacrificing the primitive being,
aside from the circumstance that, beside the primitive being, nothing
had existed in the beginning (that is to say, before the sacrifice), as
we shall soon see. If the great mystery of the mother sacrifice is meant
thereby, then all becomes clear:

               “From that great general sacrifice
               The dripping fat was gathered up.
               He formed the creatures of the air,
               And animals both wild and tame.
               From that great general sacrifice
               Richas and Sama-hymns were born;
               Therefrom the metres were produced,
               The Yajus had its birth from it.

               “The moon was gendered from his mind
               And from his eye the Sun had birth;
               Indra and Agni from his mouth
               Were born, and Vâyu from his breath.

               “Forth from his navel came midair;
               The sky was fashioned from his head;
               Earth from his feet, and from his ears
               The regions. Thus they formed the worlds.”

It is evident that by this is meant not a physical, but a psychological
cosmogony. The world arises when man discovers it. He discovers it when
he sacrifices the mother; that is to say, when he has freed himself from
the midst of his unconscious lying in the mother. That which impels him
forward to this discovery may be interpreted psychologically as the
so-called “Incest barrier” of Freud. The incest prohibition places an
end to the childish longing for the food-giving mother, and compels the
libido, gradually becoming sexual, into the path of the biological aim.
The libido forced away from the mother by the incest prohibition seeks
for the sexual object in the place of the forbidden mother. In this
wider psychologic sense, which expresses itself in the allegoric
language of the “incest prohibition,” “mother,” etc., must be understood
Freud’s paradoxical sentence, “Originally we have known only sexual
objects.”[811] This sentence must be understood psychologically
throughout, in the sense of a world image created from within outwards,
which has, in the first place, nothing to do with the so-called
“objective” idea of the world. This is to be understood as a new edition
of the subjective idea of the world corrected by reality. Biology, as a
science of objective experience, would have to reject unconditionally
Freud’s proposition, for, as we have made clear above, the function of
reality can only be partly sexual; in another equally important part it
is self-preservation. The matter appears different for that thought
which accompanies the biological function as an epiphenomenon. As far as
our knowledge reaches, the individual act of thought is dependent wholly
or in greatest part on the existence of a highly differentiated brain,
whereas the function of reality (adaptation to reality) is something
which occurs in all living nature as wholly independent from the act of
thought. This important proposition of Freud’s applies only to the act
of thought, for thinking, as we may recognize from manifold traces,
arose dynamically from the libido, which was split off from the original
object at the “incest barrier” and became actual when the first budding
sexual emotions began to flow in the current of the libido which goes to
the mother. Through the incest barrier the sexual libido is forced away
from the identification with the parents, and introverted for lack of
adequate activity. It is the sexual libido which forces the growing
individual slowly away from his family. If this necessity did not exist,
then the family would always remain clustered together in a solid group.
Hence the neurotic always renounces a complete erotic experience,[812]
in order that he may remain a child. Phantasies seem to arise from the
introversion of the sexual libido. Since the first childish phantasies
most certainly do not attain the quality of a conscious plan, and as
phantasies likewise (even among adults) are almost always the direct
derivates of the unconscious, it is, therefore, highly probable that the
first phantastic manifestations arise from an act of regression. As we
illustrated earlier, the regression goes back to the presexual stage, as
many traces show. Here the sexual libido obtains again, so to speak,
that universal capacity of application, or capacity for displacement,
which it actually possessed at that stage when the sexual application
was not yet discovered. Naturally, no adequate object is found in the
presexual stage for the regressive sexual libido, but only surrogates,
which always leave a wish; namely, the wish to have the surrogate as
similar as possible to the sexual goal. This wish is secret, however,
for it is really an incest wish. The unsatisfied unconscious wish
creates innumerable secondary objects, symbols for the primitive object,
the mother (as the Rigveda says, the creator of the world, “hiding his
origin,” enters into things). From this the thought or the phantasies
proceed, as a desexualized manifestation of _an originally sexual
libido_.

From the standpoint of the libido, the term “incest barrier” corresponds
to one aspect, but the matter, however, may be considered from another
point of view.

The time of undeveloped sexuality, about the third and the fourth year,
is, at the same time, considered externally, the period when the child
finds himself confronted with increased demands from the world of
reality. He can walk, speak and independently attend to a number of
other things. He sees himself in a relation to a world of unlimited
possibilities, but in which he dares to do little or nothing, because he
is as yet too much of a baby and cannot get on without his mother. At
this time mother should be exchanged for the world. Against this the
past rises as the greatest resistance; this is always so whenever man
would undertake a new adaptation. In spite of all evidence and against
all conscious resolutions, the unconscious (the past) always enforces
its standpoint as resistance. In this difficult position, precisely at
this period of developing sexuality, we see the dawning of the mind. The
problem of the child at this period is the discovery of the world and of
the great transsubjective reality. For that he must lose the mother;
every step out into the world means a step away from the mother.
Naturally, all that which is retrogressive in men rebels against this
step, and energetic attempts are made against this adaptation in the
first place. Therefore, this period of life is also that in which the
first clearly developed neuroses arise. The tendency of this age is one
directly opposed to that of dementia præcox. The child seeks to win the
world and to leave the mother (this is a necessary result). The dementia
præcox patient, however, seeks to leave the world and to regain the
subjectivity of childhood. We have seen that in dementia præcox the
recent adaptation to reality is replaced by an archaic mode of
adaptation; that is to say, the recent idea of the world is rejected in
favor of an archaic idea of the world. When the child renounces his task
of adaptation to reality, or has considerable difficulties in this
direction, then we may expect that the recent adaptation will again be
replaced by archaic modes of adaptation. It would, therefore, be
conceivable that through regression in children archaic products would
naturally be unearthed; that is to say, old ways of functioning of the
thought system, which is inborn with the brain differentiation, would be
awakened.

According to my available but as yet unpublished material, a remarkably
archaic and at the same time generally applicable character seems to
appertain to infantile phantasy, quite comparable with the products of
dementia præcox. It does not seem improbable that through regression at
this age those same associations of elements and analogies are
reawakened which formerly constituted the archaic idea of the world.
When we now attempt to investigate the nature of these elements, a
glance at the psychology of myths is sufficient to show us that the
archaic idea was chiefly sexual anthropomorphism. It appears that these
things in the unconscious childish phantasy play an extraordinary rôle,
as we can recognize from examples taken at random. Just as the sexualism
of neuroses is not to be taken literally but as regressive phantasy and
symbolic compensation for a recent unachieved adaptation, so is the
sexualism of the early infantile phantasy, especially the incest
problem, a regressive product of the revival of the archaic modes of
function, outweighing actuality. On this account I have expressed myself
very vaguely in this work, I am sure, in regard to the incest problem.
This is done in order not to be responsible for the idea that I
understand by it a gross sexual inclination towards the parents. The
true facts of the case are much more complicated, as my investigations
point out. Originally incest probably never possessed particularly great
significance as such, because cohabitation with an old woman for all
possible motives could hardly be preferred to mating with a young woman.
It seems that the mother has acquired incestuous significance only
psychologically. Thus, for example, the incestuous unions of antiquity
were not a result of a love inclination, but of a special superstition,
which is most intimately bound up with the mythical ideas here treated.
A Pharaoh of the second dynasty is said to have married his sister, his
daughter and his granddaughter; the Ptolemies were accustomed also to
marriage with sisters; Kambyses married his sister; Artaxerxes married
his two daughters; Qobad I (sixth century A. D.) married his daughter.
The Satrap Sysimithres married his mother. These incestuous unions are
explained by the circumstance that in the Zend Avesta the marriage of
relatives was directly commanded;[813] it emphasized the resemblance of
rulers to the divinity, and, therefore, was more of an artificial than a
natural arrangement, because it originated more from a theoretical than
from a biological inclination. (A practical impetus towards that lay
often in the peculiar laws of inheritance left over from the _Mutter
recht_, “maternal right” [matriarchal], period.) The confusion which
certainly frequently involved the barbarians of antiquity in regard to
the choice of their sexual objects cannot very well be measured by the
standard of present-day love psychology. In any case, the incest of the
semi-animal past is in no way proportionate to the enormous significance
of the incest phantasy among civilized people. This disproportion
enforces the assumption that the incest prohibition which we meet even
amongst relatively lower races concerns rather the mythical ideas than
the biological damage; therefore, the ethnical prohibition almost always
concerns the mother and seldom the father. Incest prohibition can be
understood, therefore, as a result of regression, and as the result of a
libidinous anxiety, which regressively attacks the mother. Naturally, it
is difficult or impossible to say from whence this anxiety may have
come. I merely venture to suggest that it may have been a question of a
primitive separation of the pairs of opposites which are hidden in the
will of life: the will for life and for death. It remains obscure what
adaptation the primitive man tried to evade through introversion and
regression to the parents; but, according to the analogy of the soul
life in general, it may be assumed that the libido, which disturbed the
initial equilibrium of becoming and of ceasing to be, had been stored up
in the attempt to make an especially difficult adaptation, and from
which it recedes even to-day.

After this long digression, let us turn back to the song of the Rigveda.
Thinking and a conception of the world arose from a shrinking back from
stern reality, and it is only after man has regressively assured himself
again of the protective parental power[814] that he enters life wrapped
in a dream of childhood shrouded in magic superstitions; that is to say,
“thinking,”[815] for he, timidly sacrificing his best and assuring
himself of the favor of the invisible powers, step by step develops to
greater power, in the degree that he frees himself from his
retrogressive longing and the original lack of harmony in his being.

Rigveda 10, 90, concludes with the exceedingly significant verse, which
is of greatest importance for the Christian mysteries as well:

 “Gods, sacrificing, rendered homage to the sacrifice: these were the
    earliest holy ordinances,
 The mighty ones attained the height of heaven, there where the Sâdhyas,
    goddesses of old, are dwelling.”

Through the sacrifice a fulness of power was attained, which extends up
to the power of the “parents.” Thus the sacrifice has also the meaning
of a psychologic maturation process.

In the same manner that the world originated through sacrifice, through
the renunciation of the retrospective mother libido, thus, according to
the teachings of the Upanishads, is produced the new condition of man,
which may be termed the immortal. This new condition is again attained
through a sacrifice; namely, through the sacrificial horse which is
given a cosmic significance in the teaching of the Upanishads. What the
sacrificial horse means is told by Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad 1: 1:

                                  “_Om!_

  “1. The dawn is truly the head of the sacrificial horse, the sun his
  eye, the wind his breath, his mouth the all-spreading fire, the year
  is the body of the sacrificial horse. The sky is his back, the
  atmosphere his body cavity, the earth the vault of his belly, the
  poles are his sides, the space between the poles his ribs, the seasons
  his limbs, the months and half-months his joints, day and night his
  feet, the stars his bones, the clouds his flesh, the food, which he
  digests, are the deserts; the rivers, his veins; liver and lungs, the
  mountains; the herbs and trees, his hair; the rising sun is his
  forepart, the setting sun his hind-part. When he shows his teeth, that
  is lightning; when he trembles, that is thunder; when he urinates,
  that is rain; his voice is speech.

  “2. The day, in truth, has originated for the horse as the sacrificial
  dish, which stands before him; his cradle is in the world-sea towards
  the East; the night has originated for him as the sacrificial dish,
  which stands behind him; its cradle is in the world-sea of the
  evening; these two dishes originated in order to surround the horse.
  As a charger he generated the gods, as champion he produced the
  Gandharvas, as a racer the demons, as horse mankind. The Ocean is his
  relative, the ocean his cradle.”

As Deussen remarks, the sacrificial horse has the significance of a
_renunciation of the universe_. When the horse is sacrificed, then the
world is sacrificed and destroyed, as it were—a train of thought which
Schopenhauer also had in mind, and which appears as a product of a
diseased mind in Schreber.[816] The horse in the above text stands
between two sacrificial vessels, from one of which it comes and to the
other of which it goes, just as the sun passes from morning to evening.
The horse, therefore, signifies the libido, which has passed into the
world. We previously saw that the “mother libido” must be sacrificed in
order to produce the world; here the world is destroyed by the repeated
sacrifice of the same libido, which once belonged to the mother. The
horse can, therefore, be substituted as a symbol for this libido,
because, as we saw, it had manifold connections with the mother.[817]
The sacrifice of the horse can only produce another state of
introversion, which is similar to that before the creation of the world.
The position of the horse between the two vessels, which represent the
producing and the devouring mother, hint at the idea of life enclosed in
the ovum; therefore, the vessels are destined to “surround” the horse.
That this is actually so the Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad 3: 3 proves:

  “1. From where have the descendants of Parikshit come, that I ask
  thee, Yâjñavalkya! From where came the descendants of Parikshit?

  “2. Yâjñavalkya spake: ‘He has told thee, they have come from where
  all come, who offer up the sacrificial horse. That is to say, this
  world extends so far as two and thirty days of the chariot of the Gods
  (the sun) reach. This (world) surrounds the earth twice around. This
  earth surrounds the ocean twice around. There is, as broad as the edge
  of a razor or as the wing of a fly, a space between (the two shells of
  the egg of the world). These were brought by Indra as a falcon to the
  wind: and the wind took them up into itself and carried them where
  were the offerers of the sacrificial horse. Somewhat like this he
  spoke (Gandharva to thee) and praised the wind.’

  “Therefore is the wind the special (vyashti) and the wind the
  universal (samashti). He, who knows this, defends himself from dying
  again.”

As this text tells us, the offerers of the sacrificial horse come in
that _narrowest fissure_ between the shells of the egg of the world, at
that place, where the shells _unite and where they are divided_. The
fissure (_vagina_) in the maternal world soul is designated by Plato in
“Timaeus” by Χ, the symbol of the cross. Indra, who as a falcon has
stolen the soma (the treasure attainable with difficulty), brings, as
Psychopompos, the souls to the wind, to the generating pneuma, which
carries them forward to the fissure or vagina, to the point of union, to
the entrance into the maternal egg. This train of thought of the Hindoo
philosophy briefly and concisely summarizes the sense of innumerable
myths; at the same time it is a striking example of the fact that
philosophy is internally nothing else but a refined and sublimated
mythology. It is brought to this refined state by the influence of the
corrector of reality.[818] We have emphasized the fact that in the
Miller drama the horse is the first to die, as the animal brother of the
hero. (Corresponding to the early death of the half-animal Eabani, the
brother friend of Gilgamesh.) This sacrificial death recalls the whole
category of mythological animal sacrifices. Volumes could be filled with
parallels, but we must limit ourselves here to suggestions. The
sacrificial animal, where it has lost the primitive meaning of the
simple sacrificial gift, and has taken a higher religious significance,
stands in a close relation to both the hero and the divinity. The animal
represents the god himself;[819] thus the bull[820] represents Zagreus,
Dionysus and Mithra; the lamb represents Christ,[821] etc. As we are
aware, the animal symbols represent the animal libido. The sacrifice of
the animal means, therefore, the sacrifice of the animal nature. This is
most clearly expressed in the religious legend of Attis. Attis is the
son lover of the divine mother, Agdistis Cybele. Agdistis was
characteristically androgynous,[822] as symbol of the mother-libido,
like the tree; really a clear indication that the mother-imago has in
addition to the significance of the likeness of the real mother the
meaning of the mother of humanity, the libido in general. Driven mad by
the insanity-breeding mother enamored of him, he emasculates himself,
and that under a pine tree. (The pine tree plays an important rôle in
his service. Every year a pine tree was wreathed about and upon it an
image of Attis was hung, and then it was cut down, which represents the
castration.) The blood, which spurted to the earth, was transformed into
budding violets. Cybele now took this pine tree, bore it into her cavern
and there wept over it. (Pietà.) The chthonic mother takes her son with
her into the cavern—namely, into the womb—according to another version.
Attis was transformed into the pine tree. The tree here has an
essentially phallic meaning; on the contrary, the attaching of the image
of Attis to the tree refers also to the maternal meaning. (“To be
attached to the mother.”) In Ovid (“Metamorphoses,” Book X) the pine
tree is spoken of as follows:

           “Grata deum matri, siquidem Cybeleius Attis
           Exuit hac hominem, truncoque induruit illo.”[823]

The transformation into the pine tree is evidently a burial in the
mother, just as Osiris was overgrown by the heather. Upon the Attis
bas-relief of Coblenz Attis appears _growing out of a tree_, which is
interpreted by Mannhardt as the “life-principle” of vegetation inherent
in the tree. It is probably a tree birth, just as with Mithra. (Relief
of Heddernheim.) As Firmicus observes, in the Isis and Osiris cult and
also in the cult of the virgin Persephone, tree and image had played a
rôle.[824] Dionysus had the surname Dendrites, and in Boeotia he is said
to have been called ἔνδενδρος, meaning “in a tree.” (At the birth of
Dionysus, Megaira planted the pine tree on the Kithairon.) The Pentheus
myth bound up with the Dionysus legend furnishes the remarkable and
supplementary counterpart to the death of Attis, and the subsequent
lamentation. Pentheus,[825] curious to espy the orgies of the Maenades,
_climbed upon a pine tree_, but he was observed by his mother; the
Maenades cut down the tree, and Pentheus, taken for an animal, was torn
by them in frenzy,[826] his own mother being the first to rush upon him.
In this myth the phallic meaning of the tree (cutting down, castration)
and its maternal significance (mounting and the sacrificial death of the
son) is present; at the same time the supplementary counterpart to the
Pietà is apparent, the “terrible mother.” The feast of Attis was
celebrated as a lamentation and then as a joy in the spring. (Good
Friday and Easter.) The priests of Attis-Cybele worship were often
eunuchs, and were called Galloi.[827] The archigallus was called Atys
(Attis).[828] Instead of the animal castration, the priests merely
scratched their arms until they bled. (Arm in place of phallus, “the
twisting of arms.”) A similar symbolism of the sacrificial impulse is
met in the Mithraic religion, where essential parts of the mysteries
consist in the catching and the subduing of the bull.

A parallel figure to Mithra is the primitive man Gayomard. He was
created together with his bull, and the two lived for six thousand years
in a blissful state. But when the world came into the cycle of the
seventh sign of the Zodiac (Libra) the evil principle entered. Libra is
astrologically the so-called positive domicile of Venus; the evil
principle, therefore, came under the dominion of the goddess of love
(destruction of the sun-hero through the mother-wife—snake, whore, etc).
As a result, after thirty years, Gayomard and his bull died. (The trials
of Zartusht lasted also thirty years; compare the span of Christ’s
life.) Fifty-five species of grain came from the dead bull, twelve kinds
of salubrious plants, etc. The sperma of the bull entered into the moon
for purification, but the sperma of Gayomard entered into the sun. This
circumstance possibly suggests a rather feminine meaning of bull. Gosh
or Drvâçpa is the soul of the bull, and was worshipped as a female
divinity. She would not, at first, from diffidence, become the goddess
of the herds, until the coming of Zarathustra was announced to her as
consolation. This has its parallel in the Hindoo Purâna, where the
coming of Krishna was promised the earth. (A complete analogy to
Christ.[829]) She, too, travels in her chariot, like Ardvîçûra, the
goddess of love. The soul of the bull is, therefore, decidedly feminine.
This myth of Gayomard repeats only in an altered form the primitive
conception of the closed ring of a male-female divinity, self-begetting
and forth-bringing.

Like the sacrificial bull, the fire, the sacrifice of which we have
already discussed in Chapter III, has a feminine nature among the
Chinese, according to the commentaries[830] of the philosopher
Tschwang-Tse:

  “The spirit of the hearth is called Ki. He is clad in bright red,
  which resembles fire, and appears as a lovely, attractive maiden.”

In the “Book of Rites” it is said:

  “Wood is burned in the flames for the spirit of Au. This sacrifice to
  Au is a sacrifice to old departed women.”

These spirits of the hearth and fire are the souls of departed cooks
and, therefore, are called “old women.” The kitchen god develops from
this pre-Buddhistic tradition and becomes later (male sex) the ruler of
the family and the _mediator between family and god_. Thus the old
feminine fire spirit becomes a species of Logos. (Compare with this the
remarks in Chapter III.)

From the bull’s sperma the progenitors of the cattle came, as well as
two hundred and seventy-two species of useful animals. According to
Mînôkhired, Gayomard had destroyed the Dév Azûr, who was considered the
demon of evil appetites.[831] In spite of the efforts of Zarathustra,
this demon remained longest on the earth. He was destroyed at last at
the resurrection, like Satan in the Apocalypse of John. In another
version it is said that Angromainyus and the serpent were left until the
last, so as to be destroyed by Ahuramazda himself. According to a
surmise by Kern, Zarathustra may mean “golden-star” and be identical
with Mithra. Mithra’s name is connected with neo-Persian _Mihr_, which
means “sun and love.”

In Zagreus we see that the bull is also identical with the god; hence
the bull sacrifice is a god sacrifice, but on a primitive stage. The
animal symbol is, so to speak, only a part of the hero; he sacrifices
only his animal; therefore, symbolically, renounces only his animal
nature. The internal participation in the sacrifice[832] is expressed
excellently in the anguished ecstatic countenance of the bull-slaying
Mithra. He does it willingly and unwillingly[833] hence the somewhat
hysterical expression which has some similarity to the well-known
mawkish countenance of the Crucified of Guido Reni. Benndorf says:[834]

  “The features, which, especially in the upper portion, bear an
  absolutely ideal character, have an extremely morbid expression.”

Cumont[835] himself says of the facial expression of the Tauroctonos:

  “The countenance, which may be seen in the best reproductions, is that
  of a young man of an almost feminine beauty; the head has a quantity
  of curly hair, which, rising up from the forehead, surrounds him as
  with a halo; the head is slightly tilted backwards, so that the glance
  is directed towards the heavens, and the contraction of the brows and
  the lips give a strange expression of sorrow to the face.”[836]

The Ostian head of Mithra Tauroctonos, illustrated in Cumont, has,
indeed, an expression which we recognize in our patients as one of
sentimental resignation. _Sentimentality is repressed brutality._ Hence
the exceedingly sentimental pose, which had its counterpart in the
symbolism of the shepherd and the lamb of contemporaneous Christianity,
with the addition of infantilism.[837]

Meanwhile, it is only his animal nature which the god sacrifices; that
is to say, his sexuality,[838] always in close analogy to the course of
the sun. We have learned in the course of this investigation that the
part of the libido which erects religious structures is in the last
analysis fixed in the mother, and really represents that tie through
which we are permanently connected with our origin. Briefly, we may
designate this amount of libido as “Mother Libido.” As we have seen,
this libido conceals itself in countless and very heterogeneous symbols,
also in animal images, no matter whether of masculine or feminine
nature—differences of sex are at bottom of a secondary value and
psychologically do not play the part which might be expected from a
superficial observation.

The annual sacrifice of the maiden to the dragon probably represented
the most ideal symbolic situation. In order to pacify the anger of the
“terrible mother” the most beautiful woman was sacrificed as symbol of
man’s libido. Less vivid examples are the sacrifice of the first-born
and various valuable domestic animals. A second ideal case is the
self-castration in the service of the mother (Dea Syria, etc.), a less
obvious form of which is circumcision. By that at least only a portion
is sacrificed.[839] With these sacrifices, the object of which in ideal
cases is to symbolize the libido drawing away from the mother, life is
symbolically renounced in order to regain it. By the sacrifice man
ransoms himself from the fear of death and reconciles the destroying
mother. In those later religions, where the hero, who in olden times
overcomes all evil and death through his labors, has become the divine
chief figure, he becomes the priestly sacrificer and the regenerator of
life. But as the hero is an imaginary figure and his sacrifice is a
transcendental mystery, the significance of which far exceeds the value
of an ordinary sacrificial gift, this deepening of the sacrificial
symbolism regressively resumes the idea of the human sacrifice. This is
partly due to the preponderance of phantastic additions, which always
take their subject-matter from greater depths, and partly due to the
higher religious occupation of the libido, which demanded a more
complete and equivalent expression. Thus the relation between Mithra and
his bull is very close. It is the hero himself in the Christian
mysteries who sacrifices himself voluntarily. The hero, as we have
sufficiently shown, is the infantile personality longing for the mother,
who as Mithra sacrifices the wish (the libido), and as Christ gives
himself to death both willingly and unwillingly. Upon the monuments of
the Mithraic religion we often meet a strange symbol: a crater (mixing
bowl) encoiled by a serpent, sometimes with a lion, who as antagonist
opposes the serpent.[840] It appears as if the two were fighting for the
crater. The crater symbolizes, as we have seen, the mother, the serpent
the resistance defending her, and the lion the greatest strength and
strongest will.[841] The struggle is for the mother. The serpent takes
part almost regularly in the Mithraic sacrifice of the bull, moving
towards the blood flowing from the wound. It seems to follow from that
that the life of the bull (blood) is sacrificed to the serpent.
Previously we have pointed out the mutual relationship between serpent
and bull, and found there that the bull symbolizes the living hero, the
shining sun, but that the serpent symbolizes the dead, buried or
chthonic hero, the invisible sun. As the hero is in the mother in the
state of death, the serpent is also, as the symbol of the fear of death,
the sign of the devouring mother. The sacrifice of the bull to the
serpent, therefore, signifies a willing renunciation of life, in order
to win it from death. Therefore, after the sacrifice of the bull,
wonderful fertility results. The antagonism between serpent and lion
over the crater is to be interpreted as a battle over the fruitful
mother’s womb, somewhat comparable to the more simple symbolism of the
Tishtriya song, where the demon Apaosha, the black horse, has possession
of the rain lake, and the white horse, Tishtriya, must banish him from
it. Death from time to time lays its destroying hand upon life and
fertility and the libido disappears, by entering into the mother, from
whose womb it will be born renewed. It, therefore, seems very probable
that the significance of the Mithraic bull sacrifice is also that of the
sacrifice of the mother who sends the fear of death. As the contrary of
the Occide moriturus is also intended here, so is the act of sacrifice
an impregnating of the mother; the chthonic snake demon drinks the
blood; that is to say, the libido (sperma) of the hero committing
incest. Life is thus immortalized for the hero because, like the sun, he
generates himself anew. After all the preceding materials, it can no
longer be difficult to recognize in the Christian mysteries the human
sacrifice, or the sacrifice of the son to the mother.[842] Just as Attis
emasculates himself on account of the mother, so does Christ himself
hang upon the tree of life,[843] the wood of martyrdom, the ἑκάτη,[844]
the chthonic mother, and by that redeems creation from death. By
entering again into the mother’s womb (Matuta, Pietà of Michelangelo) he
redeems in death the sin in life of the primitive man, Adam, in order
symbolically through his deed[845] to procure for the innermost and most
hidden meaning of the religious libido its highest satisfaction and most
pronounced expression. The martyrdom of Christ has in Augustine as well
actually the meaning of a Hierosgamos with the mother (corresponding to
the Adonis festival, where Venus and Adonis were laid upon the nuptial
couch):

  “Procedit Christus quasi sponsus de thalamo suo, præsagio nuptiarum
  exiit ad campum sæculi; pervenit usque ad crucis torum (torus has the
  meaning of bed, pillow, concubine, bier) et ibi firmavit ascendendo
  conjugium: ubi cum sentiret anhelantem in suspiriis creaturam
  commercio pietatis se pro conjuge dedit ad pœnam et copulavit sibi
  perpetuo iure matronam.”

This passage is perfectly clear. A similar death overtakes the Syrian
Melcarth, who, riding upon a sea horse, was annually burned. Among the
Greeks he is called Melicertes, and was represented riding upon a
dolphin. The dolphin is also the steed of Arion. We have learned to
recognize previously the maternal significance of dolphin, so that in
the death of Melcarth we can once more recognize the negatively
expressed Hierosgamos with the mother. (Compare Frazer “Golden Bough,”
IV, p. 87.) This figurative expression is of the greatest teleological
significance. Through its symbol it leads that libido which inclines
backward into the original, primitive and impulsive upwards to the
spiritual by investing it with a mysterious but fruitful function. It is
superfluous to speak of the effect of this symbol upon the unconscious
of Occidental humanity. A glance over history shows what creative forces
were released in this symbol.[846]

The comparison of the Mithraic and the Christian sacrifice plainly shows
wherein lies the superiority of the Christian symbol; it is the frank
admission that not only are the lower wishes to be sacrificed, but the
whole personality. The Christian symbol demands complete devotion; it
compels a veritable self-sacrifice to a higher purpose, while the
Sacrificium Mithriacum, remaining fixed on a primitive symbolic stage,
is contented with an animal sacrifice. The religious effect of these
symbols must be considered as an orientation of the unconscious by means
of imitation.

In Miss Miller’s phantasy there is internal compulsion, in that she
passes from the horse sacrifice to the self-sacrifice of the hero.
Whereas the first symbolizes renunciation of the sexual wishes, the
second has the deeper and ethically more valuable meaning of the
sacrifice of the infantile personality. The object of psychoanalysis has
frequently been wrongly understood to mean the renunciation or the
gratification of the ordinary sexual wish, while, in reality, the
problem is the sublimation of the infantile personality, or, expressed
mythologically, a sacrifice and rebirth of the infantile hero.[847] In
the Christian mysteries, however, the resurrected one becomes a
supermundane spirit, and the invisible kingdom of God, with its
mysterious gifts, are obtained by his believers through the sacrifice of
himself on the mother. In psychoanalysis the infantile personality is
deprived of its libido fixations in a rational manner; the libido which
is thus set free serves for the building up of a personality matured and
adapted to reality, who does willingly and without complaint everything
required by necessity. (It is, so to speak, the chief endeavor of the
infantile personality to struggle against all necessities and to create
coercions for itself where none exist in reality.)

The serpent as an instrument of sacrifice has already been abundantly
illustrated. (Legend of St. Silvester, trial of the virgins, wounding of
Rê and Philoctetes, symbolism of the lance and arrow.) It is the
destroying knife; but, according to the principle of the “Occide
moriturus” also the phallus, the sacrificial act represents a coitus act
as well.[848] The religious significance of the serpent as a
cave-dwelling, chthonic animal points to a further thought; namely, to
the creeping into the mother’s womb in the form of a serpent.[849] As
the horse is the brother, so the serpent is the sister of Chiwantopel.
This close relation refers to a fellowship of these animals and their
characters with the hero. We know of the horse that, as a rule, he is
not an animal of fear, although, mythologically, he has at times this
meaning. He signifies much more the living, positive part of the libido,
the striving towards continual renewal, whereas the serpent, as a rule,
represents the fear, the fear of death,[850] and is thought of as the
antithesis to the phallus. This antithesis between horse and serpent,
mythologically between bull and serpent, represents an opposition of the
libido within itself, a striving forwards and a striving backwards at
one and the same time.[851] It is not only as if the libido might be an
irresistible striving forward, an endless life and will for
construction, such as Schopenhauer has formulated in his world will,
death and every end being some malignancy or fatality coming from
without, but the libido, corresponding to the sun, also wills the
destruction of its creation. In the first half of life its will is for
growth, in the second half of life it hints, softly at first, and then
audibly, at its will for death. And just as in youth the impulse to
unlimited growth often lies under the enveloping covering of a
resistance against life, so also does the will of the old to die
frequently lie under the covering of a stubborn resistance against the
end.

[Illustration: PRIAPUS AND SERPENT]

This apparent contrast in the nature of the libido is strikingly
illustrated by a Priapic statuette in the antique collection at
Verona.[852] Priapus smilingly points with his finger to a snake biting
off his “membrum.” He carries a basket on his arm, filled with oblong
objects, probably phalli, evidently prepared as substitutes.

A similar motive is found in the “Deluge” of Rubens (in the Munich Art
Gallery), where a serpent emasculates a man. This motive explains the
meaning of the “Deluge”; the maternal sea is also the devouring
mother.[853] The phantasy of the world conflagration, of the cataclysmic
end of the world in general, is nothing but a mythological projection of
a personal individual will for death; therefore, Rubens could represent
the essence of the “Deluge” phantasy in the emasculation by the serpent;
for the serpent is our own repressed will for the end, for which we find
an explanation only with the greatest difficulty.

Concerning the symbolism of the serpent in general, its significance is
very dependent upon the time of life and circumstances. The repressed
sexuality of youth is symbolized by the serpent, because the arrival of
sexuality puts an end to childhood. To age, on the contrary, the serpent
signifies the repressed thought of death. With our author it is the
insufficiently expressed sexuality which as serpent assumes the rôle of
sacrificer and delivers the hero over to death and rebirth.

As in the beginning of our investigation the hero’s name forced us to
speak of the symbolism of Popocatepetl as belonging to the creating part
of the human body, so at the end does the Miller drama again give us an
opportunity of seeing how the volcano assists in the death of the hero
and causes him to disappear by means of an earthquake into the depths of
the earth. As the volcano gave birth and name to the hero, so at the end
of the day it devours him again.[854] We learn from the last words of
the hero that _his longed-for beloved_, she who alone understands him,
is called Ja-ni-wa-ma. We find in this name those lisped syllables
familiar to us from the early childhood of the hero, Hiawatha, Wawa,
wama, mama. The only one who really understands us is the mother. For
_verstehen_, “to understand” (Old High German _firstân_), is probably
derived from a primitive Germanic prefix _fri_, identical with περὶ,
meaning “roundabout.” The Old High German _antfristôn_, “to interpret,”
is considered as identical with _firstân_. From that results a
fundamental significance of the verb _verstehen_, “to understand,” as
“standing round about something.”[855] _Comprehendere_ and
κατασυλλαμβάνειν express a similar idea as the German _erfassen_, “to
grasp, to comprehend.” The thing common to these expressions is the
surrounding, the enfolding. And there is no doubt that there is nothing
in the world which so completely enfolds us as the mother. When the
neurotic complains that the world has no understanding, he says
indirectly that he misses the mother. Paul Verlaine has expressed this
thought most beautifully in his poem, “Mon Rêve Familier”:

                         _My Familiar Dream._

         “Often I have that strange and poignant dream
           Of some unknown who meets my flame with flame—
           Who, with each time, is never quite the same,
         Yet never wholly different does she seem.
         She understands me! Every fitful gleam
           Troubling my heart, she reads aright somehow:
           Even the sweat upon my pallid brow
         She soothes with tears, a cool and freshening stream.

         “If she is dark or fair? I do not know—
         Her name? Only that it is sweet and low,
           Like those of loved ones who have long since died.
         Her look is like a statue’s, kind and clear;
           And her calm voice, distant and dignified,
         Like those hushed voices that I loved to hear.”




                                 NOTES


                                 PART I


                              INTRODUCTION

Footnote 1:

  “Science of Language,” first series, p. 25.

Footnote 2:

  “Creative Evolution.”

Footnote 3:

  For a more complete presentation of Jung’s views consult his “Theory
  of Psychoanalysis” in the Nervous and Mental Disease Monograph Series,
  No. 19.

Footnote 4:

  He is said to have killed himself when he heard that she whom he so
  passionately adored was his mother.

Footnote 5:

  “Wish Fulfilment and Symbolism in Fairy Tales.” Tr. by W. A. White,
  M.D.

Footnote 6:

  “Dream and Myth.” Deuticke, Wien 1909.

Footnote 7:

  “The Myth of the Birth of the Hero.”

Footnote 8:

  “Die Symbolik in den Legenden, Märchen, Gebräuchen und Träumen.”
  _Psychiatrisch.-Neurologische Wochenschrift_, X. Jahrgang.

Footnote 9:

  “On the Nightmare.” _Amer. Journ. of Insanity_, 1910.

Footnote 10:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1910, Pt. II.

Footnote 11:

  “Die Frömmigkeit des Grafen Ludwig von Zinzendorf. Ein
  psychoanalytischer Beitrag zur Kenntnis der religiösen
  Sublimationprozesse und zur Erklärung des Pietismus.” Deuticke, Wien
  1910. We have a suggestive hint in Freud’s work, “Eine
  Kindheitserinnerung des Leonardo da Vinci.” Deuticke, Wien 1910.

Footnote 12:

  Compare Rank in _Jahrbuch_, Pt. II, p. 465.


                               CHAPTER I

Footnote 13:

  Compare Liepmann, “Über Ideenflucht,” Halle 1904; also Jung,
  “Diagnost. Assoc. Stud.,” p. 103: “Denken als Unterordnung unter eine
  herrschende Vorstellung”; compare Ebbinghaus, “Kultur der Gegenwart,”
  p. 221. Külpe (“Gr. d. Psychologie,” p. 464) expresses himself in a
  similar manner: “In thinking it is a question of an anticipatory
  apperception which sometimes governs a greater, sometimes a smaller
  circle of individual reproductions, and is differentiated from
  accidental motives of reproduction only by the consequence with which
  all things outside this circle are held back or repressed.”

Footnote 14:

  In his “Psychologia empirica meth. scientif. pertract.,” etc., 1732,
  p. 23, Christian Wolff says simply and precisely: “Cogitatio est actus
  animae quo sibi rerumque aliarum extra se conscia est.”

Footnote 15:

  The moment of adaptation is emphasized especially by William James in
  his definition of reasoning: “Let us make this ability to deal with
  novel data the technical differentia of reasoning. This will
  sufficiently mark it out from common associative thinking, and will
  immediately enable us to say just what peculiarity it contains.”

Footnote 16:

  “Thoughts are shadows of our experiences, always darker, emptier,
  simpler than these,” says Nietzsche. Lotze (“Logik,” p. 552) expresses
  himself in regard to this as follows: “Thought, left to the logical
  laws of its movement, encounters once more at the end of its regularly
  traversed course the things suppressed or hidden.”

Footnote 17:

  Compare the remarks of Baldwin following in text. The eccentric
  philosopher Johann Georg Hamann (1730–88) even places intelligence and
  speech as identical (see Hamann’s writings, pub. by Roth, Berlin
  1821). With Nietzsche intelligence fares even worse as “speech
  metaphysics” (Sprachmetaphysik). Friedrich Mauthner goes the furthest
  in this conception (“Sprache und Psychologie,” 1901). For him there
  exists absolutely no thought without speech, and speaking is thinking.
  His idea of the “fetish of the word” governing in science is worthy of
  notice.

Footnote 18:

  Compare Kleinpaul: “Das Leben der Sprache,” 3 Bände. Leipzig 1893.

Footnote 19:

  “Jardin d’Épicure,” p. 80.

Footnote 20:

  Speech is generated by the intellect and in turn generates intellect.

Footnote 21:

  It is difficult to calculate how great is the seductive influence of
  the primitive word-meaning upon a thought. “Anything which has even
  been in consciousness remains as an affective moment in the
  unconscious,” says Hermann Paul (“Prinzipien der Sprachgeschichte,”
  4th ed., 1909, p. 25). The old word-meanings have an after-effect,
  chiefly imperceptible, “within the dark chamber of the unconscious in
  the Soul” (Paul). J. G. Hamann, mentioned above, expresses himself
  unequivocably: “Metaphysics reduces all catchwords and all figures of
  speech of our empirical knowledge to empty hieroglyphics and types of
  ideal relations.” It is said that Kant learned some things from
  Hamann.

Footnote 22:

  “Grundriss der Psychologie,” p. 365.

Footnote 23:

  “Lehrbuch der Psychologie,” X, 26.

Footnote 24:

  James Mark Baldwin: “Thought and Things, or Genetic Logic.”

Footnote 25:

  In this connection I must refer to an experiment which Eberschweiler
  (_Allgemeine Zeitschrift für Psychiatrie_, 1908) has made at my
  request, which discloses the remarkable fact that in an association
  experiment the intra-psychic association is influenced by phonetic
  considerations (“Untersuchungen über den Einfluss der sprachlichen
  Komponente auf die Assoziation,” _Allgemeine Zeitschrift für
  Psychiatrie_, 1908).

Footnote 26:

  So at least this form of thought appears to Consciousness. Freud says
  in this connection (“The Interpretation of Dreams,” tr. by Brill, p.
  418): “It is demonstrably incorrect to state that we abandon ourselves
  to an aimless course of ideas when we relinquish our reflections, and
  allow the unwilled ideas to emerge. It can be shown that we are able
  to reject only those end-presentations known to us, and that
  immediately upon the cessation of these unknown or, as we inaccurately
  say, unconscious end-presentations come into play which now determine
  the course of the unwilled ideas—a thought without end-presentation
  cannot be produced through any influence we can exert on our own
  psychic life.”

Footnote 27:

  “Grundriss der Psychologie,” p. 464.

Footnote 28:

  Behind this assertion stand, first of all, experiences taken from the
  field of the normal. The undirected thinking is very far removed from
  “meditation,” and especially so as far as readiness of speech is
  concerned. In psychological experiments I have frequently found that
  the subjects of the investigation—I speak only of cultivated and
  intelligent people, whom I have allowed to indulge in reveries,
  apparently unintentionally and without previous instruction—have
  exhibited affect-expressions which can be registered experimentally.
  But the basic thought of these, even with the best of intentions, they
  could express only incompletely or even not at all. One meets with an
  abundance of similar experiences in association experiments and
  psychoanalysis—indeed, there is hardly an unconscious complex which
  has not at some time existed as a phantasy in consciousness.

  However, more instructive are the experiences from the domain of
  psychopathology. But those arising in the field of the hysterias and
  neuroses, which are characterized by an overwhelming transference
  tendency, are rarer than the experiences in the territory of the
  introversion type of neuroses and psychoses, which constitute by far
  the greater number of the mental derangements, at least the collected
  Schizophrenic group of Bleuler. As has already been indicated by the
  term “introversion,” which I briefly introduced in my study,
  “Konflikte der kindlichen Seele,” pp. 6 and 10, these neuroses lead to
  an overpowering autoerotism (Freud). And here we meet with this
  unutterable purely phantastic thinking, which moves in inexpressible
  symbols and feelings. One gets a slight impression of this when one
  seeks to examine the paltry and confused expressions of these people.
  As I have frequently observed, it costs these patients endless trouble
  and effort to put their phantasies into common human speech. A highly
  intelligent patient, who interpreted such a phantasy piece by piece,
  often said to me, “I know absolutely with what it is concerned, I see
  and feel everything, but it is quite impossible for me to find the
  words to express it.” The poetic and religious introversion gives rise
  to similar experiences; for example, Paul, in the Epistle to the
  Romans viii:26—“For we know not what we should pray for as we ought:
  but the Spirit itself maketh intercession with groanings which cannot
  be uttered.”

Footnote 29:

  Similarly, James remarks, “The great difference, in fact, between that
  simple kind of rational thinking which consists in the concrete
  objects of past experience merely suggesting each other, and reason
  distinctively so called, is this, that whilst the empirical thinking
  is only reproductive, reasoning is productive.”

Footnote 30:

  Compare the impressive description of Petrarch’s ascent of Mt.
  Ventoux, by Jacob Burckhardt (“Die Kultur der Renaissance in Italien,”
  1869, p. 235):

  “One now awaits a description of the view, but in vain, not because
  the poet is indifferent to it, but, on the contrary, because the
  impression affects him all too strongly. His entire past life, with
  all its follies, passes before him; he recalls that it is ten years
  ago to-day that he, as a young man, left Bologna, and he turns a
  yearning glance toward Italy. He opens a book—‘Confessions of St.
  Augustine,’ his companion at that time—and his eye falls upon this
  passage in the tenth chapter: ‘and the people went there and admired
  the high mountains, the wide wastes of the sea and the mighty downward
  rushing streams, and the ocean and the courses of the stars, and
  forgot themselves.’ His brother, to whom he reads these words, cannot
  comprehend why, at this point, he closes the book and is silent.”

Footnote 31:

  Wundt gives a striking description of the scholastic method in his
  “Philosophische Studien,” XIII, p. 345. The method consists “first in
  this, that one realizes the chief aim of scientific investigation is
  the discovery of a comprehensive scheme, firmly established, and
  capable of being applied in a uniform manner to the most varied
  problems; secondly, in that one lays an excessive value upon certain
  general ideas, and, consequently, upon the word-symbols designating
  these ideas, wherefore an analysis of word-meanings comes, in extreme
  cases, to be an empty subtlety and splitting of hairs, instead of an
  investigation of the real facts from which the ideas are abstracted.”

Footnote 32:

  The concluding passage in “Traumdeutung” was of prophetic
  significance, and has been brilliantly established since then through
  investigations of the psychoses. “In the psychoses these modes of
  operation of the psychic mechanism, normally suppressed in the waking
  state, again become operative, and then disclose their inability to
  satisfy our needs in the outer world.” The importance of this position
  is emphasized by the views of Pierre Janet, developed independently of
  Freud, and which deserve to be mentioned here, because they add
  confirmation from an entirely different side, namely, the biological.
  Janet makes the distinction in this function of a firmly organized
  “inferior” and “superior” part, conceived of as in a state of
  continuous transformation.

  “It is really on this superior part of the functions, on their
  adaptation to present circumstances, that the neuroses depend. The
  neuroses are the disturbances or the checks in the evolution of the
  functions—the illnesses depending upon the morbid functioning of the
  organism. These are characterized by an alteration in the superior
  part of the functions, in their evolution and in their adaptation to
  the present moment—to the present state of the exterior world and of
  the individual, and also by the absence or deterioration of the old
  parts of these same functions.

  “In the place of these superior operations there are developed
  physical, mental, and, above all, emotional disturbances. This is only
  the tendency to replace the superior operations by an exaggeration of
  certain inferior operations, and especially by gross visceral
  disturbances” (“Les Névroses,” p. 383).

  The old parts are, indeed, the inferior parts of the functions, and
  these replace, in a purposeless fashion, the abortive attempts at
  adaptation. Briefly speaking, the archaic replaces the recent function
  which has failed. Similar views concerning the nature of neurotic
  symptoms are expressed by Claparède as well (“Quelques mots sur la
  définition de l’Hystérie,” _Arch. de Psychol._, I, VII, p. 169).

  He understands the hysterogenic mechanism as a “Tendance à la
  réversion”—as a sort of atavistic manner of reaction.

Footnote 33:

  I am indebted to Dr. Abraham for the following interesting
  communication: “A little girl of three and a half years had been
  presented with a little brother, who became the object of the
  well-known childish jealousy. Once she said to her mother, ‘You are
  two mammas; you are my mamma, and your breast is little brother’s
  mamma.’ She had just been looking on with great interest at the
  process of nursing.” It is very characteristic of the archaic thinking
  of the child for the breast to be designated as “mamma.”

Footnote 34:

  Compare especially Freud’s thorough investigation of the child in his
  “Analyse der Phobie eines fünfjährigen Knaben,” 1912 _Jahrbuch_, Pt.
  I. Also my study, “Konflikte der kindlichen Seele,” 1912 _Jahrbuch_,
  Pt. II, p. 33.

Footnote 35:

  “Human, All Too Human,” Vol. II, p. 27 and on.

Footnote 36:

  “Sammlung kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre,” Pt. II, p. 205.

Footnote 37:

  “Der Künstler, Ansätze zu einer Sexualpsychologie,” 1907, p. 36.

Footnote 38:

  Compare also Rank’s later book, “The Myth of the Birth of the Hero.”

Footnote 39:

  “Wish Fulfilment and Symbolism in Fairy Tales,” 1908.

Footnote 40:

  “Dreams and Myths.”

Footnote 41:

  Compare with this “Konflikte der kindlichen Seele,” p. 6, foot.

Footnote 42:

  Compare Abraham, “Dreams and Myths.” New York 1913. The wish for the
  future is represented as already fulfilled in the past. Later, the
  childish phantasy is again taken up regressively in order to
  compensate for the disillusionment of actual life.

Footnote 43:

  Rank: “The Myth of the Birth of the Hero.”

Footnote 44:

  Naturally, it could not be said that because this was an institution
  in antiquity, the same would recur in our phantasy, but rather that in
  antiquity it was possible for the phantasy so generally present to
  become an institution. This may be concluded from the peculiar
  activity of the mind of antiquity.

Footnote 45:

  The Dioscuri married the Leucippides by theft, an act which, according
  to the ideas of higher antiquity, belonged to the necessary customs of
  marriage (Preller: “Griechische Mythologie,” 1854, Pt. II, p. 68).

Footnote 46:

  See S. Creuzer: “Symbolik und Mythologie,” 1811, Pt. III, p. 245.

Footnote 47:

  Compare also the sodomitic phantasies in the “Metamorphoses” of
  Apuleius. In Herculaneum, for example, corresponding sculptures have
  been found.

Footnote 48:

  Ferrero: “Les lois psychologiques du symbolisme.”

Footnote 49:

  With the exception of the fact that the thoughts enter consciousness
  already in a high state of complexity, as Wundt says.

Footnote 50:

  Schelling: “Philosophie der Mythologie,” Werke, Pt. II, considers the
  “preconscious” as the creative source, also H. Fichte (“Psychologie,”
  I, p. 508) considers the preconscious region as the place of origin of
  the real content of dreams.

Footnote 51:

  Compare, in this connection, Flournoy: “Des Indes à la planète Mars.”
  Also Jung: “Zur Psychologie und Pathologie sogenannter okkulter
  Phänomene,” and “Über die Psychologie der Dementia praecox.” Excellent
  examples are to be found in Schreber: “Denkwürdigkeiten eines
  Nervenkranken.” Mutze, Leipzig.

Footnote 52:

  “Jardin d’Épicure.”

Footnote 53:

  The figure of Judas acquires a great psychological significance as the
  priestly sacrificer of the Lamb of God, who, by this act, sacrifices
  himself at the same time. (Self-destruction.) Compare Pt. II of this
  work.

Footnote 54:

  Compare with this the statements of Drews (“The Christ Myth”), which
  are so violently combated by the blindness of our time. Clear-sighted
  theologians, like Kalthoff (“Entstehung des Christentums,” 1904),
  present as impersonal a judgment as Drews. Kalthoff says, “The sources
  from which we derive our information concerning the origin of
  Christianity are such that in the present state of historical research
  no historian would undertake the task of writing the biography of an
  historical Jesus.” Ibid., p. 10: “To see behind these stories the life
  of a real historical personage, would not occur to any man, if it were
  not for the influence of rationalistic theology.” Ibid., p. 9: “The
  divine in Christ, always considered an inner attribute and one with
  the human, leads in a straight line backward from the scholarly man of
  God, through the Epistles and Gospels of the New Testament, to the
  Apocalypse of Daniel, in which the theological imprint of the figure
  of Christ has arisen. At every single point of this line Christ shows
  superhuman traits; nowhere is He that which critical theology wished
  to make Him, simply a natural man, an historic individual.”

Footnote 55:

  Compare J. Burckhardt’s letter to Albert Brenner (pub. by Hans Brenner
  in the Basle _Jahrbuch_, 1901): “I have absolutely nothing stored away
  for the special interpretation of Faust. You are well provided with
  commentaries of all sorts. Hark! let us at once take the whole foolish
  pack back to the reading-room from whence they have come. What you are
  destined to find in Faust, that you will find by intuition. Faust is
  nothing else than pure and legitimate myth, a great primitive
  conception, so to speak, in which everyone can divine in his own way
  his own nature and destiny. Allow me to make a comparison: What would
  the ancient Greeks have said had a commentator interposed himself
  between them and the Oedipus legend? There was a chord of the Oedipus
  legend in every Greek which longed to be touched directly and respond
  in its own way. And thus it is with the German nation and Faust.”

Footnote 56:

  I will not conceal the fact that for a time I was in doubt whether I
  dare venture to reveal through analysis the intimate personality which
  the author, with a certain unselfish scientific interest, has exposed
  to public view. Yet it seemed to me that the writer would possess an
  understanding deeper than any objections of my critics. There is
  always some risk when one exposes one’s self to the world. The absence
  of any personal relation with Miss Miller permits me free speech, and
  also exempts me from those considerations due woman which are
  prejudicial to conclusions. The person of the author is on that
  account just as shadowy to me as are her phantasies; and, like
  Odysseus, I have tried to let this phantom drink only enough blood to
  enable it to speak, and in so doing betray some of the secrets of the
  inner life.

  I have not undertaken this analysis, for which the author owes me but
  little thanks, for the pleasure of revealing private and intimate
  matters, with the accompanying embarrassment of publicity, but because
  I wished to show the secret of the individual as one common to all.


                               CHAPTER II

Footnote 57:

  A very beautiful example of this is found in C. A. Bernoulli: “Franz
  Overbeck und Friedrich Nietzsche. Eine Freundschaft,” 1908 (Pt. I, p.
  72). This author depicts Nietzsche’s behavior in Basle society: “Once
  at a dinner he said to the young lady at his side, ‘I dreamed a short
  time ago that the skin of my hand, which lay before me on the table,
  suddenly became like glass, shiny and transparent, through which I saw
  distinctly the bones and the tissues and the play of the muscles. All
  at once I saw a toad sitting on my hand and at the same time I felt an
  irresistible compulsion to swallow the beast. I overcame my terrible
  aversion and gulped it down.’ The young lady laughed. ‘And do you
  laugh at that?’ Nietzsche asked, his deep eyes fixed on his companion,
  half questioning, half sorrowful. The young lady knew intuitively that
  she did not wholly understand that an oracle had spoken to her in the
  form of an allegory and that Nietzsche had revealed to her a glimpse
  into the dark abyss of his inner self.” On page 166 Bernoulli
  continues as follows: “One can perhaps see, behind that harmless
  pleasure of faultless exactness in dress, a dread of contamination
  arising from some mysterious and tormenting disgust.”

  Nietzsche went to Basle when he was very young; he was then just at
  the age when other young people are contemplating marriage. Seated
  next to a young woman, he tells her that something terrible and
  disgusting is taking place in his transparent hand, something which he
  must take completely into his body. We know what illness caused the
  premature ending of Nietzsche’s life. It was precisely this which he
  would tell the young lady, and her laughter was indeed discordant.

Footnote 58:

  A whole series of psychoanalytic experiences could easily be produced
  here to illustrate this statement.

Footnote 59:

  Ferenczi: “Introjektion und Übertragung,” _Jahrbuch_, Pt. I (1912).


                              CHAPTER III

Footnote 60:

  The choice of words and comparisons is always significant. A
  psychology of travels and the unconscious forces co-operating with
  them is yet to be written.

Footnote 61:

  This mental disturbance had until recently the very unfortunate
  designation, Dementia Praecox, given by Kraepelin. It is extremely
  unfortunate that this malady should have been discovered by the
  psychiatrists, for its apparently bad prognosis is due to this
  circumstance. Dementia praecox is synonymous with therapeutic
  hopelessness. How would hysteria appear if judged from the standpoint
  of psychiatry! The psychiatrist naturally sees in the institutions
  only the worst cases of dementia praecox, and as a consequence of his
  therapeutic helplessness he must be a pessimist. How deplorable would
  tuberculosis appear if the physician of an asylum for the incurable
  described the nosology of this disease! Just as little as the chronic
  cases of hysteria, which gradually degenerate in insane asylums, are
  characteristic of real hysteria, just so little are the cases of
  dementia praecox in asylums characteristic of those early forms so
  frequent in general practice, and which Janet has described under the
  name of Psychasthenia. These cases fall under Bleuler’s description of
  Schizophrenia, a name which connotes a psychological fact, and might
  easily be compared with similar facts in hysteria. The term which I
  use in my private work for these conditions is Introversion Neurosis,
  by which, in my opinion, the most important characteristic of the
  condition is given, namely, the predominance of introversion over
  transference, which latter is the characteristic feature of hysteria.

  In my “Psychology of Dementia Praecox” I have not made any study of
  the relationship of the Psychasthenia of Janet. Subsequent experience
  with Dementia Praecox, and particularly the study of Psychasthenia in
  Paris, have demonstrated to me the essential relationship of Janet’s
  group with the Introversion Neuroses (the Schizophrenia of Bleuler).

Footnote 62:

  Compare the similar views in my article, “Über die Psychologie der
  Dementia praecox,” Halle 1907; and “Inhalt der Psychose,” Deuticke,
  Wien 1908. Also Abraham: “Die psychosexuellen Differenzen der Hysterie
  und der Dementia praecox,” _Zentralblatt für Nervenheilkunde und
  Psychiatrie_, 1908. This author, in support of Freud, defines the
  chief characteristic of dementia praecox as Autoerotism, which as I
  have asserted is only one of the results of Introversion.

Footnote 63:

  Freud, to whom I am indebted for an essential part of this view, also
  speaks of “Heilungsversuch,” the attempt toward cure, the search for
  health.

Footnote 64:

  Miss Miller’s publication gives no hint of any knowledge of
  psychoanalysis.

Footnote 65:

  Here I purposely give preference to the term “Imago” rather than to
  the expression “Complex,” in order, by the choice of terminology, to
  invest this psychological condition, which I include under “Imago,”
  with living independence in the psychical hierarchy, that is to say,
  with that autonomy which, from a large experience, I have claimed as
  the essential peculiarity of the emotional complex. (Compare “The
  Psychology of Dementia Praecox.”) My critics, Isserlin especially,
  have seen in this view a return to medieval psychology, and they have,
  therefore, rejected it utterly. This “return” took place on my part
  consciously and intentionally because the phantastic, projected
  psychology of ancient and modern superstition, especially demonology,
  furnishes exhaustive evidence for this point of view. Particularly
  interesting insight and confirmation is given us by the insane
  Schreber in an autobiography (“Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken,”
  Mutze, Leipzig), where he has given complete expression to the
  doctrine of autonomy.

  “Imago” has a significance similar on the one hand to the
  psychologically conceived creation in Spitteler’s novel “Imago,” and
  upon the other hand to the ancient religious conception of “imagines
  et lares.”

Footnote 66:

  Compare my article, “Die Bedeutung des Vaters für das Schicksal des
  Einzelnen.”

Footnote 67:

  As is well known, Anaxagoras developed the conception that the living
  primal power (Urpotenz) of νοῦς (mind) imparts movement, as if by a
  blast of wind, to the dead primal power (Urpotenz) of matter. There is
  naturally no mention of sound. This νοῦς, which is very similar to the
  later conception of Philo, the λόγος σπερματικός of the Gnostics and
  the Pauline πνεῦμα (spirit) as well as to the πνεῦμα of the
  contemporary Christian theologians, has rather the old mythological
  significance of the fructifying breath of the winds, which impregnated
  the mares of Lusitania, and the Egyptian vultures. The animation of
  Adam and the impregnation of the Mother of God by the πνεῦμα are
  produced in a similar manner. The infantile incest phantasy of one of
  my patients reads: “the father covered her face with his hands and
  blew into her open mouth.”

Footnote 68:

  Haydn’s “Creation” might be meant.

Footnote 69:

  See Job xvi: 1–11.

Footnote 70:

  I recall the case of a young insane girl who continually imagined that
  her innocence was suspected, from which thought she would not allow
  herself to be dissuaded. Gradually there developed out of her
  defensive attitude a correspondingly energetic positive erotomania.

Footnote 71:

  Compare the preceding footnote with the text of Miss Miller’s.

Footnote 72:

  The case is published in “Zur Psychologie und Pathologie sogenannter
  okkulter Phänomene.” Mutze, Leipzig 1902.

Footnote 73:

  Compare Freud’s “Analyse der Phobie eines fünfjährigen Knaben,”
  _Jahrbuch_, Vol. I, 1st half; also Jung: “Konflikte der kindlichen
  Seele,” _Jahrbuch_, II, Vol. I.

Footnote 74:

  Others do not make use of this step, but are directly carried away by
  Eros.

Footnote 75:

  The heaven above, the heaven below, the sky above, the sky below, all
  things above, all things below, decline and rise.

Footnote 76:

  “La sagesse et la destinée.”

Footnote 77:

  This time I shall hardly be spared the reproach of mysticism. But
  perhaps the facts should be further considered; doubtless the
  unconscious contains material which does not rise to the threshold of
  consciousness. The analysis dissolves these combinations into their
  historical determinants, for it is one of the essential tasks of
  analysis to render impotent by dissolution the content of the
  complexes competing with the proper conduct of life. Psychoanalysis
  works backwards like the science of history. Just as the largest part
  of the past is so far removed that it is not reached by history, so
  too the greater part of the unconscious determinants is unreachable.
  History, however, knows nothing of two kinds of things, that which is
  hidden in the past and that which is hidden in the future. Both
  perhaps might be attained with a certain probability; the first as a
  postulate, the second as an historical prognosis. In so far as
  to-morrow is already contained in to-day, and all the threads of the
  future are in place, so a more profound knowledge of the past might
  render possible a more or less far-reaching and certain knowledge of
  the future. Let us transfer this reasoning, as Kant has already done,
  to psychology. Then necessarily we must come to the same result. Just
  as traces of memory long since fallen below the threshold of
  consciousness are accessible in the unconscious, so too there are
  certain very fine subliminal combinations of the future, which are of
  the greatest significance for future happenings in so far as the
  future is conditioned by our own psychology. But just so little as the
  science of history concerns itself with the combinations for the
  future, which is the function of politics, so little, also, are the
  psychological combinations for the future the object of analysis; they
  would be much more the object of an infinitely refined psychological
  synthesis, which attempts to follow the natural current of the libido.
  This we cannot do, but possibly this might happen in the unconscious,
  and it appears as if from time to time, in certain cases, significant
  fragments of this process come to light, at least in dreams. From this
  comes the prophetic significance of the dream long claimed by
  superstition.

  The aversion of the scientific man of to-day to this type of thinking,
  hardly to be called phantastic, is merely an overcompensation to the
  very ancient and all too great inclination of mankind to believe in
  prophesies and superstitions.

Footnote 78:

  Dreams seem to remain spontaneously in the memory just so long as they
  give a correct résumé of the psychologic situation of the individual.

Footnote 79:

  How paltry are the intrinsic ensemble and the detail of the erotic
  experience, is shown by this frequently varied love song which I quote
  in its epirotic form:

                           EPIROTIC LOVE SONG

           (_Zeitschrift des Vereines für Volkskunde_, XII, p. 159.)

   O Maiden, when we kissed, then it was night; who saw us?
   A night Star saw us, and the moon,
   And it leaned downward to the sea, and gave it the tidings,
   Then the Sea told the rudder, the rudder told the sailor,
   The sailor put it into song, then the neighbor heard it,
   Then the priest heard it and told my mother,
   From her the father heard it, he got in a burning anger,
   They quarrelled with me and commanded me and they have forbidden me
   Ever to go to the door, ever to go to the window.
   And yet I will go to the window as if to my flowers,
   And never will I rest till my beloved is mine.

Footnote 80:

  Job xli: 13 (Leviathan).

  “21. His breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of his mouth.

  “22. In his neck remaineth strength, and sorrow is turned into joy
  before him.

  “24. His heart is as firm as a stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the
  nether millstone.

  “25. When he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of
  breakings they purify themselves.

  “33. Upon earth there is not his like who is made without fear.

  “34. He beholdeth all high things: he is a king over all the children
  of pride.”

Chapter xlii.

  “1. Then Job answered the Lord, and said,

  “2. I know that thou canst do everything, and that no thought can be
  withholden from thee.”

Footnote 81:

The theriomorphic attributes are lacking in the Christian religion
except as remnants, such as the Dove, the Fish and the Lamb. The latter
is also represented as a Ram in the drawings in the Catacombs. Here
belong the animals associated with the Evangelists which particularly
need historical explanation. The Eagle and the Lion were definite
degrees of initiation in the Mithraic mysteries. The worshippers of
Dionysus called themselves βόες because the god was represented as a
bull; likewise the ἄρκτοι of Artemis, conceived of as a she-bear. The
Angel might correspond to the ἡλιόδρομοι of the Mithras mysteries. It is
indeed an exquisite invention of the Christian phantasy that the animal
coupled with St. Anthony is the pig, for the good saint was one of those
who were subjected to the devil’s most evil temptations.

Footnote 82:

Compare Pfister’s notable article: “Die Frömmigkeit des Grafen Ludwig
von Zinzendorf.” Wien 1910.

Footnote 83:

The Book of Job, originating at a later period under non-Jewish
influences, is a striking presentation of individual projection
psychology.

Footnote 84:

“If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in
us” (_I John_ i: 8).

Footnote 85:

“Surely he has borne our griefs and carried our sorrows” (_Isaiah_ liii:
4).

Footnote 86:

“Bear ye one another’s burdens” (_Galatians_ vi: 2).

Footnote 87:

God is Love, corresponding to the platonic “Eros” which unites humanity
with the transcendental.

Footnote 88:

Compare Reitzenstein (“Die hellenistischen Mysterienreligionen,” Leipzig
and Berlin 1910, p. 20): “Among the various forms with which a primitive
people have represented the highest religious consecration, union with
God, belongs necessarily that of the sexual union, in which man
attributes to his semen the innermost nature and power of God. That
which was in the first instance wholly a sensual act becomes in the most
widely separated places, independently, a sacred act, in which the god
is represented by a human deputy or his symbol the Phallus.”

Footnote 89:

Take as an example among many others the striking psychologic
description of the fate of Alypius, in the “Confessions” of St.
Augustine (Bk. VI, Ch. 7): “Only the moral iniquity of Carthage,
expressed in the absolute wildness of its worthless spectacles, had
drawn him down into the whirlpool of this misery. [Augustine, at that
time a teacher of Logic, through his wisdom had converted Alypius.] He
rose up after those words from the depths of the mire, into which he had
willingly let himself be submerged, and which had blinded him with fatal
pleasure. He stripped the filth from off his soul with courageous
abstemiousness. All the snares of the Hippodrome no longer perplexed
him. Thereupon Alypius went to Rome in order to study law; there he
became a backslider. He was transported to an unbelievable degree by an
unfortunate passion for gladiatorial shows. Although in the beginning he
abominated and cursed these shows, one evening some of his friends and
fellow-students, whom he met after they had dined, in spite of his
passionate refusals and the exertion of all the power of his resistance,
dragged him with friendly violence to the Amphitheatre on the occasion
of a cruel and murderous exhibition. At the time he said to them, ‘If
you drag my body to that place and hold it there, can you turn my mind
and my eyes to that spectacle?’ In spite of his supplications they
dragged him with them, eager to know if he would be able to resist the
spectacle. When they arrived they sat down where place was still left,
and all glowed with inhuman delight. He closed his eyes and forbade his
soul to expose itself to such danger. O, if he had also stopped up his
ears! When some one fell in combat and all the people set up a mighty
shout, he stifled his curiosity and prepared proudly to scorn the sight,
confident that he could view the spectacle if he so desired. And his
soul was overcome with terrible wounds, like the wounds of the body
which he desired to see, and souls more miserable than the one whose
fall had caused the outcry, which pressing through his ears, had opened
his eyes, so that his weakness had been bared. Through this he could be
struck and thrown down, for he had the feeling of confidence more than
strength, and he was the weaker because he trusted himself to this and
not to Thee. When he saw the blood, then at the same time he drew in the
desire for blood, and no longer turned away but directed his looks
thither. The fury took possession of him and yet he did not know it; he
took delight in the wicked combat and was intoxicated by the bloody
pleasure. Now he was no longer the same as when he had come, and he was
the true accomplice of those who first had dragged him there. What more
is there to say? He saw, he cried out, he was inflamed, and he carried
away with him the insane longing, which enticed him again to return, not
only in the company of those who first had dragged him with them, but
going ahead of all and leading others.”

Footnote 90:

Destiny.

Footnote 91:

Compare the prayer of the so-called Mithraic Liturgy (pub. by
Dieterich). There, characteristic places are to be found, such for
instance as: τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης μου ψυχικῆς δυνάμεως ἤν ἐγὼ πάλιν
μεταπαραλήμψομαι μετὰ τὴν ἐνεστῶσαν καὶ κατεπείγουσάν με πικρὰν ἀνάγκην
ἁχρεοκόπητον (The human soul force which I, weighed down by guilt, would
again attain, because of the present bitter need oppressing me),
ἐπικαλοῦμαι ἕνεκα τῆς κατεπειγούσης καὶ πικρᾶς ἀπαραιτήτου ἀνάγκης (On
account of the oppressing bitter and inexorable need).

From the speech of the High Priest (Apuleius: “Metamorphoses,” lib. XI,
248) a similar train of thought may be gathered. The young philosopher
Lucius was changed into an ass, that continuously rutting animal which
Isis hated. Later he was released from the enchantment and initiated
into the mysteries of Isis. When he was freed from the spell the priest
speaks as follows: “Lubrico virentis aetatulae, ad serviles delapsus
voluptates, curiositatis improsperae sinistrum praemium reportasti.—Nam
in eos, quorum sibi vitas servitium Deae nostrae majestas vindicavit,
non habet locum casus infestus—in tutelam jam receptus es Fortunae, sed
videntis” (But falling into the slavery of pleasure, in the wantonness
of buxom youth, you have reaped the inauspicious reward of your
ill-fated curiosity—for direful calamity has no power over those whose
lives the majesty of our Goddess has claimed for her own service.—You
are now received under the guardianship of fortune, but of a fortune who
can see). In the prayer to the Queen of Heaven, Isis, Lucius says: “Qua
fatorum etiam inextricabiliter contorta retractas licia et Fortunae
tempestates mitigas, et stellarum noxios meatus cohibes” (By which thou
dost unravel the inextricably entangled threads of the fates, and dost
assuage the tempests of fortune and restrain the malignant influences of
the stars).—Generally it was the purpose of the rite to destroy the
“evil compulsion of the star” by magic power.

The power of fate makes itself felt unpleasantly only when everything
goes against our will; that is to say when we no longer find ourselves
in harmony with ourselves. As I endeavored to show in my article, “Die
Bedeutung des Vaters,” etc., the most dangerous power of fate lies in
the infantile libido fixation, localized in the unconscious. The power
of fate reveals itself at closer range as a compulsion of the libido;
wherefore Maeterlinck justly says that a Socrates could not possibly be
a tragic hero of the type of Hamlet. In accordance with this conception
the ancients had already placed εἱμαρμένη (destiny) in relation to
“Primal Light,” or “Primal Fire.” In the Stoic conception of the primal
cause, the warmth spread everywhere, which has created everything and
which is therefore Destiny. (Compare Cumont: “Mysterien des Mithra,” p.
83.) This warmth is, as will later be shown, a symbol of the libido.
Another conception of the Ananke (necessity) is, according to the Book
of Zoroaster, περὶ φύσεως (concerning nature), that the air as wind had
once a connection with fertility. I am indebted to Rev. Dr. Keller of
Zurich for calling my attention to Bergson’s conception of the “durée
créatrice.”

Footnote 92:

Power for putting in motion.

Footnote 93:

Schiller says in “Wallenstein”: “In your breast lie the constellations
of your fate.” “Our fates are the result of our personality,” says
Emerson in his “Essays.” Compare with this my remarks in “Die Bedeutung
des Vaters.”

Footnote 94:

The ascent to the “Idea” is described with unusual beauty in Augustine
(Bk. X, Ch. 8). The beginning of Ch. 8 reads: “I will raise myself over
this force of my nature, step by step ascending to Him who has made me.
I will come to the fields and the spacious palaces of my memory.”

Footnote 95:

The followers of Mithra also called themselves Brothers. In
philosophical speech Mithra was Logos emanating from God. (Cumont:
“Myst. des Mithra,” p. 102.)

Besides the followers of Mithra there existed many Brotherhoods which
were called Thiasai and probably were the organizations from which the
Church developed later. (A. Kalthoff: “Die Entstehung des
Christentums.”)

Footnote 96:

Augustine, who stood in close relation to that period of transition not
only in point of time but also intellectually, writes in his
“Confessions” (Bk. VI, Ch. 16):

“Nor did I, unhappy, consider from what source it sprung, that even on
these things, foul as they were, I with pleasure discoursed with my
carnal pleasures. And yet these friends I loved for themselves only, and
friends; nor could I, even according to the notions I then had of
happiness, be happy without friends, amid what abundance soever of I
felt that I was beloved of them for myself only. O, crooked paths! Woe
to the audacious soul, which hoped, by forsaking Thee, to gain some
better thing! Turned it hath, and turned again, upon back, sides, and
belly, yet all was painful, and Thou alone rest!” (Trans. by Pusey.)

It is not only an unpsychologic but also an unscientific method of
procedure to characterize offhand such effects of religion as
suggestion. Such things are to be taken seriously as the expression of
the deepest psychologic need.

Footnote 97:

Both religions teach a pronounced ascetic morality, but at the same time
a morality of action. The last is true also of Mithracism. Cumont says
that Mithracism owed its success to the value of its morale: “This
stimulated to action in an extraordinary degree” (“Myst. des Mithra”).
The followers of Mithra formed a “sacred legion” for battle against
evil, and among them were virgins (nuns) and continents (ascetics).
Whether these brotherhoods had another meaning—that is, an
economic-communistic one—is something I will not discuss now. Here only
the religious-psychologic aspects interest us. Both religions have in
common the idea of the divine sacrifice. Just as Christ sacrificed
himself as the Lamb of God, so did Mithra sacrifice his Bull. This
sacrifice in both religions is the heart of the Mysteries. The
sacrificial death of Christ means the salvation of the world; from the
sacrifice of the bull of Mithra the entire creation springs.

Footnote 98:

This analytic perception of the roots of the Mystery Religions is
necessarily one-sided, just as is the analysis of the basis of the
religious poem. In order to understand the actual causes of the
repression in Miss Miller one must delve into the moral history of the
present; just as one is obliged to seek in the ancient moral and
economic history the actual causes of repression which have given rise
to the Mystery cults. This investigation has been brilliantly carried
out by Kalthoff. (See his book, “Die Entstehung des Christentums,”
Leipzig 1904.) I also refer especially to Pohlmann’s “Geschichte des
antiken Kommunismus und Sozialismus”; also to Bücher: “Die Aufstände der
unfreien Arbeiter 143 bis 129 v. Chr.,” 1874.

The other cause of the enormous introversion of the libido in antiquity
is probably to be found in the fact that an unbelievably large part of
the people suffered in the wretched state of slavery. It is inevitable
that finally those who bask in good fortune would be infected in the
mysterious manner of the unconscious, by the deep sorrow and still
deeper misery of their brothers, through which some were driven into
orgiastic furies. Others, however, the better ones, sank into that
strange world-weariness and satiety of the intellectuals of that time.
Thus from two sources the great introversion was made possible.

Footnote 99:

Compare Freud: “The Interpretation of the Dream.”

Footnote 100:

Compare Freud: “Sublimation,” in “Three Contributions to the Sexual
Theory.”

Footnote 101:

In a manner which is closely related to my thought, Kalthoff
(“Entstehung des Christentums”) understands the secularizing of the
religious interest as a new incarnation of the λόγος (word). He says:
“The profound grasp of the soul of nature evidenced in modern painting
and poetry, the living intuitive feeling which even science in its most
austere works can no longer do without, enables us easily to understand
how the Logos of Greek philosophy which assigned its place in the world
to the old Christ type, clothed in its world-to-come significance
celebrated a new incarnation.”

Footnote 102:

It seems, on account of the isolation of the cult, that this fact was
the cause of its ruin as well, because the eyes of that time were
blinded to the beauty of nature. Augustine (Bk. X, Ch. 6) very justly
remarks: “But they [men] were themselves undone through love for her
[creation].”

Footnote 103:

Augustine (ibid.): “But what do I love when I love Thee, Oh God? Not the
bodily form, nor the earthly sweetness, nor the splendor of the light,
so dear to these eyes; nor the sweet melodies of the richly varied
songs; not the flowers and the sweet scented ointments and spices of
lovely fragrance; not manna and honey; not the limbs of the body whose
embraces are pleasant to the flesh. I do not love these when I love my
God, and yet the light, the voice, the fragrance, the food, the embrace
of my inner man; when these shine into my soul, which no space contains,
which no time takes away, where there is a fragrance which the wind does
not blow away, where there is a taste which no gluttony diminishes and
where harmony abides which no satiety can remove—that is what I love,
when I love my God.” (Perhaps a model for Zarathustra: “Die sieben
Siegel,” Nietzsche’s works, VI, p. 33 ff.)

Footnote 104:

Cumont: “Die Mysterien des Mithra. Ein Beitrag zur Religionsgeschichte
der römischen Kaiserzeit.” Übersetzt von Gehrich, Leipzig 1903, p. 109.

Footnote 105:

41st Letter to Lucilius.

Footnote 106:

Ibid.


                               CHAPTER IV

Footnote 107:

Complexes are apt to be of the greatest stability, although their
outward forms of manifestation change kaleidoscopically. A large number
of experimental studies have entirely convinced me of this fact.

Footnote 108:

Julian the Apostate made the last, unsuccessful attempt to cause the
triumph of Mithracism over Christianity.

Footnote 109:

This solution of the libido problem was brought about in a similar
manner by the flight from the world during the first Christian century.
(The cities of the Anchorites in the deserts of the Orient.) People
mortified themselves in order to become spiritual and thus escape the
extreme brutality of the decadent Roman civilization. Asceticism is
forced sublimation, and is always to be found where the animal impulses
are still so strong that they must be violently exterminated. The masked
self-murder of the ascetic needs no further biologic proof.

Chamberlain (“Foundations of the Nineteenth Century”) sees in the
problem a biologic suicide because of the enormous amount of
illegitimacy among Mediterranean peoples at that time. I believe that
illegitimacy tends rather to mediocrity and to living for pleasure. It
appears after all that there were, at that time, fine and noble people
who, disgusted with the frightful chaos of that period which was merely
an expression of the disruption of the individual, put an end to their
lives, and thus caused the death of the old civilization with its
endless wickedness.

Footnote 110:

  “The last age of Cumean prophecy has come already!
  Over again the great series of the ages commences:
  Now too returns the Virgin, return the Saturnian kingdoms;
  Now at length a new progeny is sent down from high Heaven.
  Only, chaste Lucina, to the boy at his birth be propitious,
  In whose time first the age of iron shall discontinue,
  And in the whole world a golden age arise: now rules thy Apollo.

  “Under thy guidance, if any traces of our guilt continue,
  Rendered harmless, they shall set the earth free from fear forever,
  He shall partake of the life of the gods, and he shall see
  Heroes mingled with gods, and he too shall be seen by them.
  And he shall rule a peaceful world with his father’s virtues.”

Footnote 111:

Δίκη (Justice), daughter of Zeus and Themis, who, after the Golden Age,
forsook the degenerate earth.

Footnote 112:

Thanks to this eclogue, Virgil later attained the honor of being a
semi-Christian poet. To this he owes his position as guide to Dante.

Footnote 113:

Both are represented not only as Christian, but also as Pagan. Essener
and Therapeuten were quasi orders of the Anchorites living in the
desert. Probably, as, for instance, may be learned from Apuleius
(“Metamorphoses,” lib. XI), there existed small settlements of mystics
or consecrated ones around the sacred shrines of Isis and Mithra. Sexual
abstinence and celibacy were also known.

Footnote 114:

            “Below the hills, a marshy plain
            Infects what I so long have been retrieving:
            This stagnant pool likewise to drain
            Were now my latest and my best achieving.
            To many millions following let me furnish soil.”

The analogy of this expression with the quotation above is striking.

Footnote 115:

Compare Breuer and Freud: “Studien über Hysterie”; also Bleuler: “Die
Psychoanalyse Freuds,” _Jahrbuch_, 1910, Vol. II, 2nd half.

Footnote 116:

Faust (in suicide monologue):

             “Out on the open ocean speeds my dreaming!
             The glassy flood before my feet is gleaming!
             A new day beckons to a newer shore!

             A fiery chariot, borne on buoyant pinions,
             Sweeps near me now; I soon shall ready be
             To pierce the ether’s high, unknown dominions,
             To reach new spheres of pure activity!
             This godlike rapture, this supreme existence
             Do I, but now a worm, deserve to track?
             Yes, resolute to reach some brighter distance;
             On Earth’s fair sun I turn my back!

                    ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

             Ah, that no wing can lift me from the soil,
             Upon its tract to follow, follow soaring!
             Then would I see eternal Evening gild
             The silent world beneath me glowing.

                    ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

             And now before mine eyes expands the ocean,
             With all its bays in shining sleep!

                    ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

             The new-born impulse fires my mind,
             I hasten on, his beams eternal drinking.”

We see it is the same longing and the same sun.

Footnote 117:

Compare Jung: “Diagnost. Assoc. Stud.”; also “The Psychology of Dementia
Praecox,” Chs. II and III.

Footnote 118:

According to the Christian conception _God is Love_.

Footnote 119:

Apuleius (“Met.,” lib. XI, 257): “At manu dextera gerebam flammis
adultam facem: et caput decora corona cinxerat palmae candidae foliis in
modum radiorum prosistentibus. Sic ad instar solis exornato et in vicem
simulacri constituto” (Then in my right hand I carried a burning torch;
while a graceful chaplet encircled my head, the shining leaves of the
palm tree projecting from it like rays of light. Thus arrayed like the
sun, and placed so as to resemble a statue).

Footnote 120:

The parallel in the Christian mysteries is the crowning with the crown
of thorns, the exhibition and mocking of the Savior.

Footnote 121:

Sacred word.

Footnote 122:

I am a star wandering about with you, and flaming up from the depths.

Footnote 123:

In the same way the Sassanian Kings called themselves “Brothers of the
Sun and of the Moon.” In Egypt the soul of every ruler was a
reduplication of the Sun Horus, an incarnation of the sun.

Footnote 124:

“The rising at day out of the Underworld.” Erman: “Aegypten,” p. 409.

Footnote 125:

Compare the coronation above. Feather, a symbol of power. Feather crown,
a crown of rays, halo. Crowning, as such, is an identification with the
sun. For example, the spiked crown upon the Roman coins made its
appearance at the time when the Cæsars were identified with _Sol
invictus_ (“Solis invicti comes”). The halo is the same, that is to say,
an image of the sun, just as is the tonsure. The priests of Isis had
smooth-shaven heads like stars. (See Apuleius, “Metamorphoses.”)

Footnote 126:

Compare with this my statements in “Über die Bedeutung des Vaters für
das Schicksal des Einzelnen.” Deuticke, Wien.

Footnote 127:

In the text of the so-called Mithra Liturgy are these lines: “Εγώ εἴμι
σύμπλανος ὑμῖν ἀστὴρ καὶ ἐκ τοῦ βάθους ἀναλάμπων—ταῦτά σον εἰπόντος
εὐθέως ὁ δίσκος ἁπλωθήσεται” (I am a star wandering about with you and
flaming up from the depths. When thou hast said this, immediately the
disc of the sun will unfold). The mystic through his prayers implored
the divine power to cause the disc of the sun to expand. In the same way
Rostand’s “Chantecler” causes the sun to rise by his crowing.

“For verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed,
ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it
shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you” (Matthew xvii:
20).

Footnote 128:

Compare especially the words of the Gospel of John: “I and my Father are
one” (John x: 30). “He that hath seen me hath seen the Father” (John
xiv: 9). “Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me”
(John xiv: 11). “I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world; again, I leave the world, and go to the Father” (John xvi: 28).
“I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God”
(John xx: 17).

Footnote 129:

See the footnote on p. 137 of text.

Footnote 130:

Hear me, grant me my prayer—Binding together the fiery bolts of heaven
with spirit, two-bodied fiery sky, creator of humanity, fire-breathing,
fiery-spirited, spiritual being rejoicing in fire, beauty of humanity,
ruler of humanity of fiery body, light-giver to men, fire-scattering,
fire-agitated, life of humanity, fire-whirled, mover of men who
confounds with thunder, famed among men, increasing the human race,
enlightening humanity, conqueror of stars.

Footnote 131:

Two-bodied: an obscure epithet, if one does not admit that the dual life
of the redeemed, taught in the mysteries of that time, was attributed to
God, that is to say, to the libido. Compare the Pauline conception of
the σῶμα σαρκικόν and πνευματικόν (carnal and spiritual body). In the
Mithraic worship, Mithra seems to be the divine spirit, while Helios is
the material god; to a certain extent the visible lieutenant of the
divinity. Concerning the confusion between Christ and Sol, see below.

Footnote 132:

Compare Freud: “Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory.”

Footnote 133:

Renan (“Dialogues et fragments philosophiques,” p. 168) says: “Before
religion had reached the stage of proclaiming that God must be put into
the absolute and ideal, that is to say, beyond this world, one worship
alone was reasonable and scientific: that was the worship of the sun.”

Footnote 134:

The path of the visible Gods will appear through the sun, the God my
father.

Footnote 135:

Buber: “Ekstat. Konfess.,” p. 51 and on.

Footnote 136:

“Liebesgesänge an Gott,” cited by Buber: “Ekstat. Konfess.,” p. 40. An
allied symbolism is found in Carlyle: “The great fact of existence is
great to him. Fly as he will, he can not get out of the awful presence
of this reality. His mind is so made; he is great by that first of all.
Fearful and wonderful, real is life, real is death, is this universe to
him. Though all men should forget its truth, and walk in a vain show, he
can not. At all moments the Flame-image glares in upon him” (“Heroes and
Hero-Worship”).

One can select from literature at random. For example, S. Friedländer
(Berlin-Halensee) says in _Jugend_, 1910, No. 35, p. 823: “Her longing
demands from the beloved only the purest. Like the sun, it burns to
ashes with the flame of excessive life, which refuses to be light,” and
so on.

Footnote 137:

Buber: Ibid., p. 45.

Footnote 138:

I emphasize this passage because its idea contains the psychological
root of the “Wandering of the soul in Heaven,” the conception of which
is very ancient. It is a conception of the wandering sun which from its
rising to its setting wanders over the world. The wandering gods are
representations of the sun, that is, symbols of the libido. This
comparison is indelibly impressed in the human phantasy as is shown by
the poem of Wesendonck:

GRIEF.

                  The sun, every evening weeping,
                  Reddens its beautiful eyes for you;
                  When early death seizes you,
                  Bathing in the mirror of the sea.

                  Still in its old splendor
                  The glory rises from the dark world;
                  You awaken anew in the morning
                  Like a proud conqueror.

                  Ah, why then should I lament,
                  When my heart, so heavy, sees you?
                  Must the sun itself despair?
                  Must the sun set?

                  And does death alone bear life?
                  Do griefs alone give joys?
                  O, how grateful I am that
                  Such pains have given me nature!

Another parallel is in the poem of Ricarda Huch:

          As the earth, separating from the sun,
          Withdraws in quick flight into the stormy night,
          Starring the naked body with cold snow,
          Deafened, it takes away the summer joy.
          And sinking deeper in the shadows of winter,
          Suddenly draws close to that which it flees,
          Sees itself warmly embraced with rosy light
          Leaning against the lost consort.
          Thus I went, suffering the punishment of exile,
          Away from your countenance, into the ancient place.
          Unprotected, turning to the desolate north,
          Always retreating deeper into the sleep of death;
          And then would I awake on your heart,
          Blinded by the splendor of the dawn.

Footnote 139:

Translated by Dr. T. G. Wrench.

Footnote 140:

After you have said the second prayer, when silence is twice commanded;
then whistle twice and snap twice,[856] and straightway you will see
many five-pointed stars coming down from the sun and filling the whole
lower air. But say once again—Silence! Silence! and you, Neophyte, will
see the Circle and fiery doors cut off from the opening disc of the sun.

Footnote 141:

Five-fingered stars.

Footnote 142:

“Ecce Homo,” translated by A. M. Ludovici.

Footnote 143:

The water-god Sobk, appearing as a crocodile, was identified with Rê.

Footnote 144:

Erman: “Aegypten,” p. 354.

Footnote 145:

Erman: Ibid., p. 355.

Footnote 146:

Compare above ἀστέρας πενταδακτυλιαίους (“five-fingered stars”).

Footnote 147:

The bull Apis is a manifestation of Ptah. The bull is a well-known
symbol of the sun.

Footnote 148:

Amon.

Footnote 149:

Sobk of Faijum.

Footnote 150:

The God of Dedu in the Delta, who was worshipped as a piece of wood.
(Phallic.)

Footnote 151:

This reformation, which was inaugurated with much fanaticism, soon broke
down.

Footnote 152:

Apuleius, “Met.,” lib. XI, p. 239.

Footnote 153:

It is noteworthy that the humanists too (I am thinking of an expression
of the learned Mutianus Rufus) soon perceived that antiquity had but two
gods, that is, a masculine god and a feminine god.

Footnote 154:

Not only was the light- or fire-substance ascribed to the divinity but
also to the soul; as for example in the system of Mâni, as well as among
the Greeks, where it was characterized as a fiery breath of air. The
Holy Ghost of the New Testament appears in the form of flames around the
heads of the Apostles, because the πνεῦμα was understood to mean “fiery”
(Dieterich: Ibid., p. 116). Very similar is the Iranian conception of
Hvarenô, by which is meant the “Grace of Heaven” through which a monarch
rules. By “Grace” is understood a sort of fire or shining glory,
something very substantial (Cumont: Ibid., p. 70). We come across
conceptions allied in character in Kerner’s “Seherin von Prevorst,” and
in the case published by me, “Psychologie und Pathologie sogenannter
occulter Phänomene.” Here not only the souls consist of a spiritual
light-substance, but the entire world is constructed according to the
white-black system of the Manichæans—and this by a fifteen-year-old
girl! The intellectual over-accomplishment which I observed earlier in
this creation, is now revealed as a consequence of energetic
introversion, which again roots up deep historical strata of the soul
and in which I perceive a regression to the memories of humanity
condensed in the unconscious.

Footnote 155:

In like manner the so-called tube, the origin of the ministering wind,
will become visible. For it will appear to you as a tube hanging down
from the sun.

Footnote 156:

I add to this a quotation from Firmicus Maternus (Mathes. I, 5, 9, cit.
by Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” I, p. 40): “Cui (animo) descensus per
orbem solis tribuitur” (To this spirit the descent through the orb of
the sun is attributed).

Footnote 157:

St. Hieronymus remarks, concerning Mithra who was born in a miraculous
manner from a rock, that this birth was the result of “solo aestu
libidinis” (merely through the heat of the libido) (Cumont: “Textes et
Monuments,” I, p. 163).

Footnote 158:

Mead: “A Mithraic Ritual.” London 1907, p. 22.

Footnote 159:

I am indebted to my friend and co-worker, Dr. Riklin, for the knowledge
of the following case which presents an interesting symbolism. It
concerns a paranoic who passed over into a manifest megalomaniac in the
following way: She suddenly saw a _strong light_, a _wind blew_ upon
her, she felt as if “her heart turned over,” and from that moment she
knew that God had visited her and was in her.

I wish to refer here to the interesting correlation of mythological and
pathological forms disclosed in the analytical investigation of Dr. S.
Spielrein, and expressly emphasize that she has discovered the
symbolisms presented by her in the _Jahrbuch_, through independent
experimental work, in no way connected with my work.

Footnote 160:

“You will see the god youthful, graceful, with glowing locks, in a white
garment and a scarlet cloak, with a fiery helmet.”

Footnote 161:

“You will see a god very powerful, with a shining countenance, young,
with golden hair, clothed in white vestments, with a golden crown,
holding in his right hand a bullock’s golden shoulder, that is, the bear
constellation, which wandering hourly up and down, moves and turns the
heavens: then out of his eyes you will see lightning spring forth and
from his body, stars.”

Footnote 162:

According to the Chaldean teaching the sun occupies the middle place in
the choir of the seven planets.

Footnote 163:

The Great Bear consists of seven stars.

Footnote 164:

Mithra is frequently represented with a knife in one hand and a torch in
the other. The knife as an instrument of sacrifice plays an important
rôle in his myth.

Footnote 165:

Ibid.

Footnote 166:

Compare with this the scarlet mantle of Helios in the Mithra liturgy. It
was a part of the rites of the various cults to be dressed in the bloody
skins of the sacrificial animals, as in the Lupercalia, Dionysia and
Saturnalia, the last of which has bequeathed to us the Carnival, the
typical figure of which, in Rome, was the priapic Pulcinella.

Footnote 167:

Compare the linen-clad retinue of Helios. Also the bull-headed gods wear
white περιζώματα (aprons).

Footnote 168:

The title of Mithra in Vendidad XIX, 28; cit. by Cumont: “Textes et
Monuments,” p. 37.

Footnote 169:

The development of the sun symbol in Faust does not go as far as an
anthropomorphic vision. It stops in the suicide scene at the chariot of
Helios (“A fiery chariot borne on buoyant pinions sweeps near me now”).
The fiery chariot comes to receive the dying or departing hero, as in
the ascension of Elijah or of Mithra. (Similarly Francis of Assisi.) In
his flight Faust passes over the sea, just as does Mithra. The ancient
Christian pictorial representations of the ascension of Elijah are
partly founded upon the corresponding Mithraic representations. The
horses of the sun-chariot rushing upwards to Heaven leave the solid
earth behind, and pursue their course over a water god, Oceanus, lying
at their feet. (Cumont: “Textes et Monuments.” Bruxelles 1899, I, p.
178.)

Footnote 170:

Compare my article, “Psych. und Path. sog. occ. Phän.”

Footnote 171:

Quoted from Pitra: “Analecta sacra,” cit. by Cumont: “Textes et
Monuments,” p. 355.

Footnote 172:

Helios, the rising sun—the only sun rising from heaven!

Footnote 173:

Cited from Usener: “Weihnachtsfest,” p. 5.

Footnote 174:

“O, how remarkable a providence that Christ should be born on the same
day on which the sun moves onward, V. Kal. of April the fourth holiday,
and for this reason the prophet Malachi spoke to the people concerning
Christ: ‘Unto you shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in
his wings,’ this is the sun of righteousness in whose wings healing
shall be displayed.”

Footnote 175:

The passage from Malachi is found in chap. iv, 2: “But unto you that
fear my name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in His
wings” (feathers). This figure of speech recalls the Egyptian sun
symbol.

Footnote 176:

Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” t. I, p. 355. περὶ ἀστρονόμων.

Footnote 177:

“Moreover the Lord is born in the month of December in the winter on the
8th Kal. of January when the ripe olives are gathered, so that the oil,
that is the chrism, may be produced, moreover they call it the birthday
of the Unconquered One. Who in any case is as unconquered as our Lord,
who conquered death itself? Or why should they call it the birthday of
the sun; he himself is the sun of righteousness, concerning whom
Malachi, the prophet, spoke: ‘The Lord is the author of light and of
darkness, he is the judge spoken of by the prophet as the Sun of
righteousness.’”

Footnote 178:

“Ah! woe to the worshippers of the sun and the moon and the stars. For I
know many worshippers and prayer sayers to the sun. For now at the
rising of the sun, they worship and say, ‘Have mercy on us,’ and not
only the sun-gnostics and the heretics do this, but also Christians who
leave their faith and mix with the heretics.”

Footnote 179:

The pictures in the Catacombs contain much symbolism of the sun. The
Swastika cross, for example—a well-known image of the sun, wheel of the
sun, or sun’s feet—is found upon the garment of Fossor Diogenes in the
cemetery of Peter and Marcellinus. The symbols of the rising sun, the
bull and the ram, are found in the Orpheus fresco of the cemetery of the
holy Domitilla. Similarly the ram and the peacock (which, like the
phœnix, is the symbol of the sun) is found upon an epitaph of the
Callistus Catacomb.

Footnote 180:

Compare the countless examples in Görres: “Die christliche Mystik.”

Footnote 181:

Compare Leblant: “Sarcophages de la Gaule,” 1880. In the “Homilies” of
Clement of Rome (“Hom.,” II, 23, cit. by Cumont) it is said: Τῷ κυρίῳ
γεγονάσιν δώδεκα ἀπόστολοι τῶν τοῦ ἡλίου δώδεκα μηνῶν φέροντες τὸν
ἀριθμόν (The twelve apostles of the Lord, having the number of the
twelve months of the sun). As is apparent, this idea is concerned with
the course of the sun through the Zodiac. Without wishing to enter upon
an interpretation of the Zodiac, I mention that, according to the
ancient view (probably Chaldean), the course of the sun was represented
by a snake which carried the signs of the Zodiac on its back (similarly
to the Leontocephalic God of the Mithra mysteries). This view is proven
by a passage from a Vatican Codex edited by Cumont in another connection
(190, saec. XIII, p. 229, p. 85): “τότε ὁ πάνσοφος δημιουργὸς ἄκρῳ
νεύματι ἐκίνησε τὸν μέγαν δράκοντα σὺν τῷ κεκοσμημένῳ στεφάνῳ, λέγω δὴ
τὰ ἰβ’ ζῴδια, βαστάζοντα ἐπὶ τοῦ νώτου αὐτοῦ” (The all-wise maker of the
world set in motion the great dragon with the adorned crown, with a
command at the end. I speak now of the twelve images borne on the back
of this).

This inner connection of the ζῴδια (small images) with the zodiacal
snake is worthy of notice and gives food for thought. The Manichæan
system attributes to Christ the symbol of the snake, and indeed of the
snake on the tree of Paradise. For this the quotation from John gives
far-reaching justification (John iii:14): “And as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the son of man be lifted up.” An
old theologian, Hauff (“Biblische Real- und Verbalkonkordanz,” 1834),
makes this careful observation concerning this quotation: “Christ
considered the Old Testament story an unintentional symbol of the idea
of the atonement.” The almost bodily connection of the followers with
Christ is well known. (Romans xii:4): “For as we have many members in
one body, and all members have not the same office, so we being many are
one body in Christ, and every one members one of another.” If
confirmation is needed that the zodiacal signs are symbols of the
libido, then the sentence in John i:29, “Behold the Lamb of God, which
taketh away the sin of the world,” assumes a significant meaning.

Footnote 182:

According to an eleventh-century manuscript in Munich; Albrecht Wirth:
“Aus orientalischen Chroniken,” p. 151. Frankfurt 1894.

Footnote 183:

“To Zeus, the Great Sun God, the King, the Saviour.”

Footnote 184:

Abeghian: “Der armenische Volksglaube,” p. 41, 1899.

Footnote 185:

Compare Aigremont: “Fuss- und Schuhsymbolik,” Leipzig 1909.

Footnote 186:

Attis was later assimilated with Mithra. Like Mithra he was represented
with the Phrygian cap (Cumont: “Myst. des Mith.,” p. 65). According to
the testimony of Hieronymus, the manger (Geburtshöhle) at Bethlehem was
originally a sanctuary (Spelæum) of Attis (Usener: “Weihnachtsfest,” p.
283).

Footnote 187:

Cumont (“Die Mysterien des Mithra,” p. 4) says of Christianity and
Mithracism: “Both opponents perceived with astonishment how similar they
were in many respects, without being able to account for the causes of
this similarity.”

Footnote 188:

Our present-day moral views come into conflict with this wish in so far
as it concerns the erotic fate. The erotic adventures necessary for so
many people are often all too easily given up because of moral
opposition, and one willingly allows himself to be discouraged because
of the social advantages of being moral.

Footnote 189:

The poetical works of Lord Byron.

Footnote 190:

Edmond Rostand: “Cyrano de Bergerac,” Paris 1898.

Footnote 191:

The projection into the “cosmic” is the primitive privilege of the
libido, for it enters into our perception naturally through all the
avenues of the senses, apparently from without, and in the form of pain
and pleasure connected with the objects. This we attribute to the object
without further thought, and we are inclined, in spite of our
philosophic considerations, to seek the causes in the object, which
often has very little concern with it. (Compare this with the Freudian
conception of Transference, especially Firenczi’s remarks in his paper,
“Introjektion und Übertragung,” _Jahrbuch_, Vol. I, p. 422.) Beautiful
examples of direct libido projection are found in erotic songs:

          “Down on the strand, down on the shore,
          A maiden washed the kerchief of her lover;
          And a soft west wind came blowing over the shore,
          Lifted her skirt a little with its breeze
          And let a little of her ankles be seen,
          And the seashore became as bright as all the world.”

  (Neo-Grecian Folksong from Sanders: “Das Volksleben der Neugriechen,”
  1844, p. 81, cit. _Zeitschrift des Vereines für Volkskunde_, Jahrgang
  XII, 1902, p. 166.)

                 “In the farm of Gymir I saw
                 A lovely maiden coming toward me;
                 From the brilliance of her arm glowed
                 The sky and all the everlasting sea.”

  (From the Edda, tr. (into Ger.) by H. Gering, p. 53; _Zeitschrift für
  Volkskunde_, Jahrgang XII, 1902, p. 167.)

Here, too, belong all the miraculous stories of cosmic events, phenomena
occurring at the birth and death of heroes. (The Star of Bethlehem;
earthquakes, the rending asunder of the temple hangings, etc., at the
death of Christ.) The omnipotence of God is the manifest omnipotence of
the libido, the only actual doer of wonders which we know. The symptom
described by Freud, as the “omnipotence of thought” in Compulsion
Neuroses arises from the “sexualizing” of the intellect. The historical
parallel for this is the magical omnipotence of the mystic, attained by
introversion. The “omnipotence of thought” corresponds to the
identification with God of the paranoic, arrived at similarly through
introversion.

Footnote 192:

Comparable to the mythological heroes who after their greatest deeds
fall into spiritual confusion.

Footnote 193:

Here I must refer you to the blasphemous piety of Zinzendorf, which has
been made accessible to us by the noteworthy investigation of Pfister.

Footnote 194:

Anah is really the beloved of Japhet, the son of Noah. She leaves him
because of the angel.

Footnote 195:

The one invoked is really a star. Compare Miss Miller’s poem.

Footnote 196:

Really an attribute of the wandering sun.

Footnote 197:

Compare Miss Miller’s poem.

              “My poor life is gone,

                     ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

                        then having gained
              One raptured glance, I’ll die content,
              For I the source of beauty, warmth and life
              Have in his perfect splendor once beheld.”

Footnote 198:

The light-substance of God.

Footnote 199:

The light-substance of the individual soul.

Footnote 200:

The bringing together of the two light-substances shows their common
origin; they are the symbols of the libido. Here they are figures of
speech. In earlier times they were doctrines. According to Mechthild von
Magdeburg the soul is made out of love (“Das fliessende Licht der
Gottheit,” herausgegeben von Escherich, Berlin 1909).

Footnote 201:

Compare what is said above about the snake symbol of the libido. The
idea that the climax means at the same time the end, even death, forces
itself here.

Footnote 202:

Compare the previously mentioned pictures of Stuck: Vice, Sin and Lust,
where the woman’s naked body is encircled by the snake. Fundamentally it
is a symbol of the most extreme fear of death. The death of Cleopatra
may be mentioned here.

Footnote 203:

Encircling by the serpent.




                                PART II


                               CHAPTER I

Footnote 204:

This is the way it appears to us from the psychological standpoint. See
below.

Footnote 205:

Samson as Sun-god. See Steinthal: “Die Sage von Simson,” _Zeitschrift
für Völkerpsychologie_, Vol. II.

Footnote 206:

I am indebted for the knowledge of this fragment to Dr. Van Ophuijsen of
The Hague.

Footnote 207:

Rudra, properly father of the Maruts (winds), a wind or sun god, appears
here as the sole creator God, as shown in the course of the text. The
rôle of creator and fructifier easily belongs to him as wind god. I
refer to the observations in Part I concerning Anaxagoras and to what
follows.

Footnote 208:

This and the following passages from the Upanishads are quoted from:
“The Upanishads,” translated by R. G. S. Mead and J. C. Chattopâdhyâya.
London 1896.

Footnote 209:

In a similar manner, the Persian sun-god Mithra is endowed with an
immense number of eyes.

Footnote 210:

Whoever has in himself, God, the sun, is immortal, like the sun. Compare
Pt. I, Ch. 5.

Footnote 211:

Bayard Taylor’s translation of “Faust” is used throughout this
book.—TRANSLATOR.

Footnote 212:

He was given that name because he had introduced the phallic cult into
Greece. In gratitude to him for having buried the mother of the
serpents, the young serpents cleaned his ears, so that he became
clairaudient and understood the language of birds and beasts.

Footnote 213:

Compare the vase picture of Thebes, where the Cabiri are represented in
noble and in caricatured form (in Roscher: “Lexicon,” s. Megaloi Theoi).

Footnote 214:

The justification for calling the Dactyli thumbs is given in a note in
Pliny: 37, 170, according to which there were in Crete precious stones
of iron color and thumblike shape which were called Idaean Dactyli.

Footnote 215:

Therefore, the dactylic metre or verse.

Footnote 216:

See Roscher: “Lexicon of Greek and Roman Mythology,” s. Dactyli.

Footnote 217:

According to Jensen: “Kosmologie,” p. 292, Oannes-Ea is the educator of
men.

Footnote 218:

Inman: “Ancient Pagan and Modern Christian Symbolism.”

Footnote 219:

Varro identifies the μεγάλοι θεοί with the Penates. The Cabiri might be
simulacra duo virilia Castoris et Pollucis in the harbor of Samothrace.

Footnote 220:

In Brasiae on the Laconian coast and in Pephnos some statues only a foot
high with caps on their heads were found.

Footnote 221:

That the monks have again invented cowls seems of no slight importance.

Footnote 222:

_Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, II, p. 187.

Footnote 223:

The typical motive of the youthful teacher of wisdom has also been
introduced into the Christ myth in the scene of the twelve-year-old
Jesus in the temple.

Footnote 224:

Next to this, there is a female figure designated as ΚΡΑΤΕΙΑ, which
means “one who brings forth” (Orphic).

Footnote 225:

Roscher: “Lexicon,” s. v. Megaloi Theoi.

Footnote 226:

Comrade—fellow-reveller.

Footnote 227:

Roscher: “Lexicon,” s. v. Phales.

Footnote 228:

Compare Freud’s evidence, _Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, I, p. 188. I
must remark at this place that etymologically penis and penates are not
grouped together. On the contrary, πέος, πόσυη, Sanskrit _pása-ḥ_, Latin
_penis_, were given with the Middle High German _visel_ (penis) and Old
High German _fasel_ the significance of fœtus, _proles_. (Walde: “Latin
Etymologie,” s. Penis.)

Footnote 229:

Stekel in his “Traumsymbolik” has traced out this sort of representation
of the genitals, as has Spielrein also in a case of dementia praecox.
1912 _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 369.

Footnote 230:

The figure of Κράτεια, the one who “brings forth,” placed beside it is
surprising in that the libido occupied in creating religion has
apparently developed out of the primitive relation to the mother.

Footnote 231:

In Freud’s paper (“Psychoanalytische Bemerkungen über einen Fall von
Paranoia usw.,” 1912 _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 68), which appeared
simultaneously with the first part of my book, he makes an observation
absolutely parallel to the meaning of my remarks concerning the “libido
theory” resulting from the phantasies of the insane Schreber: Schreber’s
divine rays composed by condensation of sun’s rays, nerve fibres and
sperma are really nothing else but the libido fixations projected
outside and objectively represented, and lend to his delusion a striking
agreement with our theory. That the world must come to an end because
the ego of the patient attracts all the rays to himself; that later
during the process of reconstruction he must be very anxious lest God
sever the connection of the rays with him: these and certain other
peculiarities of Schreber’s delusion sound very like the foregoing
endopsychic perceptions, on the assumption of which I have based the
interpretation of paranoia.

Footnote 232:

“Tuscalanarum quaestionum,” lib. IV.

Footnote 233:

From the good proceed desire and joy—joy having reference to some
present good, and desire to some future one—but joy and desire depend
upon the opinion of good; as desire being inflamed and provoked is
carried on eagerly toward what has the appearance of good, and joy is
transported and exults on obtaining what was desired: for we naturally
pursue those things that have the appearance of good, and avoid the
contrary—wherefore as soon as anything that has the appearance of good
presents itself, nature incites us to endeavor to obtain it. Now where
this strong desire is consistent and founded on prudence, it is by the
stoics called Bulesis and the name which we give it is volition, and
this they allow to none but their wise men, and define it thus; volition
is a reasonable desire; but whatever is incited too violently in
opposition to reason, that is a lust or an unbridled desire which is
discoverable in all fools.—_The Tusculan Disputation_, Cicero, page 403.

Footnote 234:

“Pro Quint.,” 14.

Footnote 235:

Libido is used for arms and military horses rather than for dissipations
and banquets.

Footnote 236:

Walde: “Latin Etymological Dictionary,” 1910. See libet. _Liberi_
(children) is grouped together with _libet_ by Nazari (“Riv. di Fil.,”
XXXVI, 573). Could this be proven, then Liber, the Italian god of
procreation, undoubtedly connected with _liberi_, would also be grouped
with _libet_. Libitina is the goddess of the dead, who would have
nothing in common with Lubentina and Lubentia (attribute of Venus),
which belongs to _libet_; the name is as yet unexplained. (Compare the
later comments in this work.) _Libare_ = to pour (to sacrifice?) and is
supposed to have nothing to do with _liber_. The etymology of _libido_
shows not only the central setting of the idea, but also the connection
with the German _Liebe_ (love). We are obliged to say under these
circumstances that not only the idea, but also the word _libido_ is well
chosen for the subject under discussion.

Footnote 237:

A corrected view on the conservation of energy in the light of the
theory of cognition might offer the comment that this picture is the
projection of an endopsychic perception of the equivalent
transformations of the libido.


                               CHAPTER II

Footnote 238:

Freud: “Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory,” p. 29. Translation by
Brill. “In a non-sexual ‘impulse’ originating from impulses of motor
sources we can distinguish a contribution from a stimulus-receiving
organ, such as the skin, mucous membrane, and sensory organs. This we
shall here designate as an erogenous zone; it is that organ the stimulus
of which bestows on the impulse the sexual character.”

Footnote 239:

Freud: Ibid., p. 14. “One definite kind of contiguity, consisting of
mutual approximation of the mucous membranes of the lips in the form of
a kiss, has among the most civilized nations received a sexual value,
though the parts of the body concerned do not belong to the sexual
apparatus but form the entrance to the digestive tract.”

Footnote 240:

See Freud: Ibid.

Footnote 241:

An old view which Möbius endeavored to bring again to its own. Among the
newcomers it is Fouillée, Wundt, Beneke, Spencer, Ribot and others, who
grant the psychologic primate to the impulse system.

Footnote 242:

Freud: Ibid., p. 25. “I must repeat that these psychoneuroses, as far as
my experience goes, are based on sexual motive powers. I do not mean
that the energy of the sexual impulse contributes to the forces
supporting the morbid manifestations (symptoms), but I wish distinctly
to maintain that this supplies the only constant and the most important
source of energy in the neurosis, so that the sexual life of such
persons manifests itself either exclusively, preponderately, or
partially in these symptoms.”

Footnote 243:

That scholasticism is still firmly rooted in mankind is only too easily
proven, and an illustration of this is the fact that not the least of
the reproaches directed against Freud, is that he has changed certain of
his earlier conceptions. Woe to those who compel mankind to learn anew!
“Les savants ne sont pas curieux.”

Footnote 244:

_Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 65.

Footnote 245:

Schreber’s case is not a pure paranoia in the modern sense.

Footnote 246:

Also in “Der Inhalt der Psychose,” 1908.

Footnote 247:

Compare Jung: “The Psychology of Dementia Praecox,” p. 114.

Footnote 248:

For example, in a frigid woman who as a result of a specific sexual
repression does not succeed in bringing the libido sexualis to the
husband, the parent imago is present and she produces symptoms which
belong to that environment.

Footnote 249:

Similar transgression of the sexual sphere might also occur in
hysterical psychoses; that indeed is included with the definition of the
psychosis and means nothing but a general disturbance of adaptation.

Footnote 250:

“Die psychosexuellen Differenzen der Hysterie und der Dementia praecox,”
_Zentralblatt für Nervenheilkunde und Psychiatrie_, 1908.

Footnote 251:

“Introjektion und Übertragung,” _Jahrbuch_, Vol. I, p. 422.

Footnote 252:

See Avenarius: “Menschliche Weltbegriffe,” p. 25.

Footnote 253:

“Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,” Vol. I, p. 54.

Footnote 254:

“Theogonie.”

Footnote 255:

Compare Roscher: “Lexicon,” p. 2248.

Footnote 256:

Drews: “Plotinus,” Jena 1907, p. 127.

Footnote 257:

Ibid., p. 132.

Footnote 258:

One substance in three forms.

Footnote 259:

Ibid., p. 135.

Footnote 260:

Plotinus: “Enneades,” II, 5, 3.

Footnote 261:

Plotinus: “Enneades,” IV, 8, 3.

Footnote 262:

“Enneades,” III, 5, 9.

Footnote 263:

Ibid., p. 141.

Footnote 264:

Naturally this does not mean that the function of reality owes its
existence to the differentiation in procreative instincts exclusively. I
am aware of the undetermined great part played by the function of
nutrition.

Footnote 265:

Malthusianism is the artificial setting forth of the natural tendency.

Footnote 266:

For instance, in the form of procreation as in general of the will.

Footnote 267:

Freud in his work on paranoia has allowed himself to be carried over the
boundaries of his original conception of libido by the facts of this
illness. He there uses libido even for the function of reality, which
cannot be reconciled with the standpoint of the “Three Contributions.”

Footnote 268:

Bleuler arrives at this conclusion from the ground of other
considerations, which I cannot always accept. See Bleuler, “Dementia
Praecox,” in Aschaffenburg’s “Handbuch der Psychiatrie.”

Footnote 269:

See Jung: “Kritik über E. Bleuler: Zur Theorie des schizophrenen
Negativismus.” _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 469.

Footnote 270:

Spielrein: “Über den psychologischen Inhalt eines Falles von
Schizophrenie.” _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 329.

Footnote 271:

His researches are in my possession and their publication is in
preparation.

Footnote 272:

Honegger made use of this example in his lecture at the private
psychoanalytic congress in Nürnberg, 1910.

Footnote 273:

Spielrein: Ibid., pp. 338, 353, 387. For soma as the “effusion of the
seed,” see what follows.

Footnote 274:

Compare Berthelot: “Les Alchémistes Grecs,” and Spielrein: Ibid., p.
353.

Footnote 275:

I cannot refrain from observing that this vision reveals the original
meaning of alchemy. A primitive magic power for generation, that is to
say, a means by which children could be produced without the mother.

Footnote 276:

Spielrein: Ibid., pp. 338, 345.

Footnote 277:

I must mention here those Indians who create the first people from the
union of a sword hilt and a shuttle.

Footnote 278:

Ibid., p. 399.


                              CHAPTER III

Footnote 279:

Naturally a precursor of onanism.

Footnote 280:

This true catatonic pendulum movement of the head, I saw arise in the
case of a catatonic patient, from the coitus movements gradually shifted
upwards. This Freud has described long ago as a shifting from below to
above.

Footnote 281:

She put the small fragments which fell out into her mouth and ate them.

Footnote 282:

“Dreams and Myths.” Vienna 1909. Translated by Wm. A. White, M.D.

Footnote 283:

A. Kuhn: “Mythologische Studien,” Vol. I: “Die Herabkunft des Feuers und
des Göttertrankes.” Gütersloh 1886. A very readable résumé of the
contents is to be found in Steinthal: “Die ursprüngliche Form der Sage
von Prometheus,” _Zeitschrift für Völkerpsychologie und
Sprachwissenschaft_, Vol. II, 1862; also in Abraham: Ibid.

Footnote 284:

Also mathnâmi and mâthayati. The root _manth_ or _math_ has a special
significance.

Footnote 285:

_Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung_, Vol. II, p. 395, and
Vol. IV, p. 124.

Footnote 286:

I learn (that which is learned, knowledge; the act of learning), to take
thought beforehand, to Prometheus (forethought).

Footnote 287:

Prometheus, the herald of the Titans.

Footnote 288:

Bapp in Roscher’s “Lexicon,” Sp. 3034.

Footnote 289:

_Bhṛgu_ = φλεγυ, a recognized connection of sound. See Roscher: Sp.
3034, 54.

Footnote 290:

For the eagle as a fire token among the Indians, see Roscher: Sp. 3034,
60.

Footnote 291:

The stem _manth_ according to Kuhn becomes in German _mangeln_, _rollen_
(referring to washing). Manthara is the butter paddle. When the gods
generated the amrta (drink of immortality) by twirling the ocean around,
they used the mountain Mandara as the paddle (see Kuhn: Ibid., p. 17).
Steinthal calls attention to the Latin expression in poetical speech:
_mentula_ = male member, in which _ment_ (_manth_) was used. I add here
also, _mentula_ is to be taken as diminutive for _menta_ or _mentha_
(μίνθα), _Minze_. In antiquity the _Minze_ was called “Crown of
Aphrodite” (Dioscorides, II, 154). Apuleius called it “mentha venerea”;
it was an aphrodisiac. (The opposite meaning is found in Hippocrates: Si
quis eam saepe comedat, ejus genitale semen ita colliquescit, ut
effluat, et arrigere prohibet et corpus imbecillum reddit), and
according to Dioscorides, Minze is a means of preventing conception.
(See Aigremont: “Volkserotik und Pflanzenwelt,” Vol. I, p. 127). But the
ancients also said of Menta: “Menta autem appellata, quod suo odore
mentem feriat—mentae ipsius odor animum excitat.” This leads us to the
root _ment_—in Latin _mens_; English, mind—with which the parallel
development to _pramantha_, Προμηθεύς, would be completed. Still to be
added is that an especially strong chin is called _mento_ (_mentum_). A
special development of the chin is given, as we know, to the priapic
figure of Pulcinello, also the pointed beard (and ears) of the satyrs
and the other priapic demon, just as in general all the protruding parts
of the body can be given a masculine significance and all the receding
parts or depressions a feminine significance. This applies also to all
other animate or inanimate objects. See Maeder: _Psycho.-Neurol.
Wochenschr._, X. Jahrgang. However, this whole connection is more than a
little uncertain.

Footnote 292:

Abraham observes that in Hebrew the significance of the words for man
and woman is related to this symbolism.

Footnote 293:

“What is called the gulya (pudendum) means the yoni (the birthplace) of
the God; the fire, which was born there, is called ‘beneficent’”
(“Kâtyâyanas Karmapradîpa,” I, 7; translated by Kuhn: “Herabkunft des
Feuers,” p. 67). The etymologic connection between _bohren_—_geboren_ is
possible. The Germanic _bŏrôn_ (to bore) is primarily related to the
Latin _forare_ and the Greek φαράω = to plow. Possibly it is an
Indo-Germanic root _bher_ with the meaning to bear; Sanscrit _bhar-_;
Greek φερ-; Latin _fer-_; from this Old High German _beran_, English to
bear, Latin _fero_ and _fertilis_, _fordus_ (pregnant); Greek φορός.
Walde (“Latin Etym.,” s. Ferio) traces _forare_ to the root _bher-_.
Compare with this the phallic symbolism of the plough, which we meet
later on.

Footnote 294:

Weber: “Indische Studien,” I, 197; quoted by Kuhn: Ibid., p. 71.

Footnote 295:

“Rigveda,” III, 29—1 to 3.

Footnote 296:

Or mankind in general. Viçpatni is the feminine wood, viçpati, an
attribute of Agni, the masculine. In the instruments of fire lies the
origin of the human race, from the same perverse logic as in the
beforementioned shuttle and sword-hilt. Coitus as the means of origin of
the human race must be denied, from the motive, to be more fully
discussed later, of a primitive resistance against sexuality.

Footnote 297:

Wood as the symbol of the mother is well known from the dream
investigation of the present time. See Freud: “Dream Interpretation.”
Stekel (“Sprache des Traumes,” p. 128) explains it as the symbol of the
woman. Wood is also a German vulgar term for the breast. (“Wood before
the house.”) The Christian wood symbolism needs a chapter by itself. The
son of Ilâ: Ilâ is the daughter of Manus, the one and only, who with the
help of his fish has overcome the deluge, and then with his daughter
again procreated the human race.

Footnote 298:

See Hirt: “Etymologie der neuhochdeutschen Sprache,” p. 348.

Footnote 299:

The capitular of Charlemagne of 942 forbade “those sacrilegious fires
which are called Niedfyr.” See Grimm: “Mythologie,” 4th edition, p. 502.
Here there are to be found descriptions of similar fire ceremonies.

Footnote 300:

Kuhn: Ibid., p. 43.

Footnote 301:

Instead of preserving the divine faith in its purity, the reader will
call to mind the fact that in this year when the plague, usually called
Lung sickness, attacked the herds of cattle in Laodonia, certain bestial
men, monks in dress but not in spirit, taught the ignorant people of
their country to make fire by rubbing wood together and to set up a
statue of Priapus, and by that method to succor the cattle. After a
Cistercian lay brother had done this near Fentone, in front of the
entrance of the “Court,” he sprinkled the animals with holy water and
with the preserved testicles of a dog, etc.

Footnote 302:

Preuss: “Globus,” LXXXVI, 1905, S. 358.

Footnote 303:

Compare with this Friedrich Schultze: “Psychologie der Naturvölker,” p.
161.

Footnote 304:

This primitive play leads to the phallic symbolism of the plough. Ἀροῦν
means to plough and possesses in addition the poetic meaning of
impregnate. The Latin _arare_ means merely to plough, but the phrase
“fundum alienum arare” means “to pluck cherries in a neighbor’s garden.”
A striking representation of the phallic plough is found on a vase in
the archeological museum in Florence. It portrays a row of six naked
ithyphallic men who carry a plough represented phallically (Dieterich:
“Mutter Erde,” p. 107). The “carrus navalis” of our spring festival
(carnival) was at times during the Middle Ages a plough (Hahn: “Demeter
und Baubo,” quoted by Dieterich: Ibid., p. 109). Dr. Abegg of Zurich
called my attention to the clever work of R. Meringer (“Wörter und
Sachen. Indogermanische Forschungen,” 16, 179/84, 1904). We are made
acquainted there with a very far-reaching amalgamation of the libido
symbols with the external materials and external activities, which
support our previous considerations to an extraordinary degree.
Meringer’s assumption proceeds from the two Indo-Germanic roots, _ṷen_
and _ṷeneti_. Indo-Germanic _*uen Holz_, ai. ist. _van_, _vana_. Agni is
_garbhas vanām_, “fruit of the womb of the woods.”

Indo-Germanic _*ṷeneti_ signifies “he ploughs”: by that is meant the
penetration of the ground by means of a sharpened piece of wood and the
throwing up of the earth resulting from it. This verb itself is not
verified because this very primitive working of the ground was given up
at an early time. When a better treatment of the fields was learned, the
primitive designation for the ploughed field was given to the pasture,
therefore Gothic _vinja_, υομη, Old Icelandic _vin_, pasture, meadow.
Perhaps also the Icelandic _Vanen_, as Gods of agriculture, came from
that.

From _ackern_ (to plough) sprang _coïre_ (the connection might have been
the other way); also Indo-Germanic _*ṷenos_ (enjoyment of love), Latin
_venus_. Compare with this the root _ṷen_ = wood. _Coïre_ = passionately
to strive; compare Old High German _vinnan_, to rave or to storm; also
the Gothic _vēns_; ἐλπις = hope; Old High German _wân_ = expectation,
hope; Sanscrit _van_, to desire or need; further, _Wonne_ (delight,
ecstasy); Old Icelandic _vinr_ (beloved, friend). From the meaning
_ackern_ (to plough) arises _wohnen_ (to live). This transition has been
completed only in the German. From _wohnen_ → _gewöhnen_, _gewohnt sein_
(to be accustomed), Old Icelandic _vanr_ = _gewohnt_ (to be accustomed);
from _ackern_ further → _sich mühen_, _plagen_ (to take much trouble,
wearing work), Old Icelandic _vinna_, to work: Old High German _winnan_
(to toil hard, to overwork); Gothic _vinnan_, πάσχειν; _vunns_, πάθημα.
From _ackern_ comes, on the other hand, _gewinnen_, _erlangen_ (to win,
to attain), Old High German _giwinnan_, but also _verletzen_ (to
injure): Gothic _vunds_ (_wund_), wound. _Wund_ in the beginning, the
most primal sense, was therefore the ground torn up by the wooden
implement. From _verletzen_ (to injure) come _schlagen_ (to strike),
_besiegen_ (to conquer): Old High German _winna_ (strife); Old Saxon
_winnan_ (to battle).

Footnote 305:

The old custom of making the “bridal bed” upon the field, which was for
the purpose of rendering the field fertile, contains the primitive
thought in the most elementary form; by that the analogy was expressed
in the clearest manner: Just as I impregnate the woman, so do I
impregnate the earth. The symbol leads the sexual libido over to the
cultivation of the earth and to its fruitfulness. Compare with that
Mannhardt: “Wald- und Feldkulte,” where there are abundant
illustrations.

Footnote 306:

Spielrein’s patient (_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 371) associates fire and
generation in an unmistakable manner. She says as follows concerning it:
“One needs iron for the purpose of piercing the earth and for the
purpose of creating fire.” This is to be found in the Mithra liturgy as
well. In the invocation to the fire god, it is said: ὁ συνδήσας πνεύματι
τὰ πὑρινα κλεῖθρα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ (Thou who hast closed up the fiery locks
of heaven, with the breath of the spirit,—open to me). “With iron one
can create cold people from the stone.” The boring into the earth has
for her the meaning of fructification or birth. She says: “With the
glowing iron one can pierce through mountains. The iron becomes glowing
when one pushes it into a stone.”

Compare with this the etymology of _bohren_ and _gebären_ (see above).
In the “Bluebird” of Maeterlinck the two children who seek the bluebird
in the land of the unborn children, find a boy who bores into his nose.
It is said of him: he will discover a new fire, so as to warm the earth
again, when it will have grown cold.

Footnote 307:

Compare with this the interesting proofs in Bücher: “Arbeit und
Rhythmus,” Leipzig 1899.

Footnote 308:

Amusement is undoubtedly coupled with many rites, but by no means with
all. There are some very unpleasant things.

Footnote 309:

The Upanishads belong to the Brâhmana, to the theology of the Vedic
writings, and comprise the theosophical-speculative part of the Vedic
teachings. The Vedic writings and collections are in part of very
uncertain age and may reach back to a very distant past because for a
long period they were handed down only orally.

Footnote 310:

The primal and omniscient being, the idea of whom, translated into
psychology, is comprehended in the conception of libido.

Footnote 311:

Âtman is also considered as originally a bisexual being—corresponding to
the libido theory. The world sprang from desire. Compare
_Bṛihadâraṇyaka-Upaniṣhad_, I, 4, 1 (Deussen):

  “(1) In the beginning this world was Âtman alone—he looked around:
  Then he saw nothing but himself.

  “(2) Then he was frightened; therefore, one is afraid, when one is
  alone. Then he thought: Wherefore should I be afraid, since there is
  nothing beside myself?

  “(3) But also he had no joy, therefore one has no joy when one is
  alone. Then he longed for a companion.”

After this there follows the description of his division quoted above.
Plato’s conception of the world-soul approaches very near to the Hindoo
idea. “The soul in no wise needed eyes, because near it there was
nothing visible. Nothing was separate from it, nothing approached it,
because outside of it there was nothing” (“Timaios”).

Footnote 312:

Compare with this Freud’s “Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory.”

Footnote 313:

What seems an apparently close parallel to the position of the hand in
the Upanishad text I observed in a little child. The child held one hand
before his mouth and rubbed it with the other, a movement which may be
compared to that of the violinist. It was an early infantile habit which
persisted for a long time afterwards.

Footnote 314:

Compare Freud: “Bemerkungen über einen Fall von Zwangsneurose.” 1912
_Jahrbuch_, Vol. I, p. 357.

Footnote 315:

As shown above, in the child the libido progresses from the mouth zone
into the sexual zone.

Footnote 316:

Compare what has been said above about Dactyli. Abundant examples are
found in Aigremont: “Fuss- und Schuhsymbolik.”

Footnote 317:

When, in the enormously increased sexual resistance of the present day,
women emphasize the secondary signs of sex and their erotic charm by
specially designed clothing, that is a phenomenon which belongs in the
same general scheme for the heightening of allurement.

Footnote 318:

It is well known that the orifice of the ear has also a sexual value. In
a hymn to the Virgin it is called “quæ per aurem concepisti.” Rabelais’
Gargantua was born through his mother’s ear. Bastian (“Beiträge z.
vergl. Psychologie,” p. 238) mentions the following passage from an old
work, “There is not to be found in this entire kingdom, even among the
very smallest girls, a maiden, because even in her tender youth she puts
a special medicine into her genitals, also in the orifice of her ears;
she stretches these and holds them open continuously.”—Also the
Mongolian Buddha was born from the ear of his mother.

Footnote 319:

The driving motive for the breaking up of the ring might be sought, as I
have already intimated in passing, in the fact that the secondary sexual
activity (the transformed coitus) never is or would be adapted to bring
about that natural satiety, as is the activity in its real place. With
this first step towards transformation, the first step towards the
characteristic dissatisfaction was also taken, which later drove man
from discovery to discovery without allowing him ever to attain satiety.
Thus it looks from the biological standpoint, which however is not the
only one possible.

Footnote 320:

Translated by Mead and Chattopâdhyâya. Sec. 1, Pt. II.

Footnote 321:

In a song of the Rigveda it is said that the hymns and sacrificial
speeches, as well as all creation in general, have proceeded from the
“entirely fire consumed” Purusha (primitive man-creator of the world).

Footnote 322:

To shine; to show forth; reveal;—light.

Footnote 323:

I said; they said; a saying; an oracle.

Footnote 324:

Compare Brugsch: “Religion und Myth. d. alt. Aegypter,” p. 255 f., and
the Egyptian dictionary.

Footnote 325:

The German word “Schwan” belongs here, therefore it sings when dying. It
is the sun. The metaphor in Heine supplements this very beautifully.

                     “Es singt der Schwan im Weiher
                     Und rudert auf und ab,
                     Und immer leiser singend,
                     Taucht er ins Flutengrab.”

Hauptmann’s “Sunken Bell” is a sun myth in which bell = sun = life =
libido.

Footnote 326:

Why is it wonderful to understand the universe, if men are able? i.e.,
men in whose very being the universe exists and each one (of whom) is a
representative of God in miniature? Or is it right to believe that men
have sprung in any way except from heaven—He alone stands in the midst
of the citadel, a conqueror, his head erect and his shining eyes fixed
on the stars.

Footnote 327:

Loosely connected with ag-ilis. See Max Müller: “Vorl. über den Ursprung
und die Entwicklung der Religion,” p. 237.

Footnote 328:

An Eranian name of fire is _Nairyôçağha_ = masculine word. The Hindoo
_Narâçam̆sa_ means wish of men (Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,” II,
49). Fire has the significance of Logos (compare Ch. 7, “Siegfried”). Of
_Agni_ (fire), Max Müller, in his introduction to “The Science of
Comparative Religions,” says: “It was a conception familiar to India to
consider the fire upon the altar as being at the same time subject and
object. The fire burned the sacrifice and was thereby similar to the
priest, the fire carried the sacrifice to the gods, and was thereby an
intercessor between men and the gods: fire itself, however, represented
also something divine, a god, and when honor was to be shown to this
god, then fire was as much the subject as the object of the sacrifice.
Hence the first conception, that Agni sacrificed itself, i.e. that it
produced for itself its own sacrifice, and next that it brings itself to
the sacrifice.” The contact of this line of thought with the Christian
symbol is plainly apparent. Krishna utters the same thought in the
“Bhagavad-Gîtâ,” b. IV (translated by Arnold, London 1910):

                    “All’s then God!
            The sacrifice is Brahm, the ghee and grain
            Are Brahm, the fire is Brahm, the flesh it eats
            Is Brahm, and unto Brahm attaineth he
            Who, in such office, meditates on Brahm.”

The wise Diotima sees behind this symbol of fire (in Plato’s symposium,
c. 23). She teaches Socrates that Eros is “the intermediate being
between mortals and immortals, a great Demon, dear Socrates; for
everything demoniac is just the intermediate link between God and man.”
Eros has the task “of being interpreter and messenger from men to the
gods, and from the gods to men, from the former for their prayers and
sacrifices, from the latter for their commands and for their
compensations for the sacrifices, and thus filling up the gap between
both, so that through his mediation the whole is bound together with
itself.” Eros is a son of Penia (poverty, need) generated by Poros
intoxicated with nectar. The meaning of Poros is dark; πόρος means way
and hole, opening. Zielinski: “Arch. f. Rel. Wissensch.,” IX, 43 ff.,
places him with Phoroneus, identical with the fire-bringer, who is held
in doubt; others identify him with primal chaos, whereas others read
arbitrarily Κόρος and Μόρος. Under these circumstances, the question
arises whether there may not be sought behind it a relatively simple
sexual symbolism. Eros would be then simply the son of Need and of the
female genitals, for this door is the beginning and birthplace of fire.
Diotima gives an excellent description of Eros: “He is manly, daring,
persevering, a strong hunter (archer, compare below) and an incessant
intriguer, who is constantly striving after wisdom,—a powerful sorcerer,
poison mixer and sophist; and he is respected neither as an immortal nor
as a mortal, but on the same day he first blooms and blossoms, when he
has attained the fulness of the striving, then dies in it but always
awakens again to life because of the nature of his father (rebirth!);
attainment, however, always tears him down again.” For this
characterization, compare Chs. V, VI and VII of this work.

Footnote 329:

Compare Riklin: “Wish Fulfilment and Symbolism in Fairy Tales,”
translated by Wm. White, M.D., where a child is produced by the parents
placing a little turnip in the oven. The motive of the furnace where the
child is hatched is also found again in the type of the whale-dragon
myth. It is there a regularly recurring motive because the belly of the
dragon is very hot, so that as the result of the heat the hero loses his
hair—that is to say, he loses the characteristic covering of hair of the
adult and becomes a child. (Naturally the hair is related to the sun’s
rays, which are extinguished in the setting of the sun.) Abundant
examples of this motive are in Frobenius: “Das Zeitalter des
Sonnengottes,” Vol. I. Berlin 1904.

Footnote 330:

A potion of immortality.

Footnote 331:

This aspect of Agni is similar to Dionysus, who bears a remarkable
parallel to both the Christian and the Hindoo mythology.

Footnote 332:

“Now everything in the world which is damp, he created from sperma, but
this is the soma.” _Bṛihadâraṇyaka-Upaniṣhad_, 1–4.

Footnote 333:

The question is whether this significance was a secondary development.
Kuhn seems to assume this. He says (“Herabkunft des Feuers,” p. 18):
“However, together with the meaning of the root _manth_ already evolved,
there has also developed in the Vedas the conception of ‘tearing off’
due naturally to the mode of procedure.”

Footnote 334:

Examples in Frobenius: “Das Zeitalter des Sonnengottes.”

Footnote 335:

See in this connection Stekel: “Die sexuelle Wurzel der Kleptomanie,”
_Zeitschrift für Sexualwissenschaft_, 1908.

Footnote 336:

Even in the Roman Catholic church at various places the custom prevailed
for the priest to produce once a year the ceremonial fire.

Footnote 337:

I must remark that the designation of onanism as a “great discovery” is
not merely a play with words on my part. I owe it to two young patients
who pretended that they were in possession of a terrible secret; that
they had discovered something horrible, which no one had ever known
before, because had it been known great misery would have overtaken
mankind. Their discovery was onanism.

Footnote 338:

One must in fairness, however, consider that the demands of life,
rendered still more severe by our moral code, are so heavy that it
simply is impossible for many people to attain that goal which can be
begrudged to no one, namely the possibility of love. Under the cruel
compulsion of domestication, what is left but onanism, for those people
possessed of an active sexuality? It is well known that the most useful
and best men owe their ability to a powerful libido. This energetic
libido longs for something more than merely a Christian love for the
neighbor.

Footnote 339:

I am fully conscious that onanism is only an intermediate phenomenon.
There always remains the problem of the original division of the libido.

Footnote 340:

In connection with my terminology mentioned in the previous chapter, I
give the name of autoerotic to this stage following the incestuous love.
Here I emphasize the erotic as a regressive phenomenon; the libido
blocked by the incest barrier regressively takes possession of an older
way of functioning anterior to the incestuous object of love. This may
be comprehended by Bleuler’s terminology, Autismus, that is, the
function of pure self-preservation, which is especially distinguished by
the function of nutrition. However, the terminology “autismus” cannot
very well be longer applied to the presexual material, because it is
already used in reference to the mental state of dementia praecox where
it has to include autoerotism plus introverted desexualized libido.
Autismus designates first of all a pathological phenomenon of regressive
character, the presexual material, however, of a normal functioning, the
chrysalis stage.


                               CHAPTER IV

Footnote 341:

Therefore that beautiful name of the sun-hero Gilgamesh: Wehfrohmensch
(pain-joy human being). See Jensen: “Gilgamesh Epic.”

Footnote 342:

Compare here the interesting researches of H. Silberer. 1912 _Jahrbuch_,
Vol. I, p. 513.

Footnote 343:

See Bleuler: _Psychiatr.-neurol. Wochenschrift_, XII. Jahrgang, Nr. 18
to 21.

Footnote 344:

Compare with this my explanations in _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 469.

Footnote 345:

Compare the exhortation by Krishna to the irresolute Arjuna in
Bhagavad-Gîtâ: “But thou, be free of the pairs of opposites!” Bk. II,
“The Song Celestial,” Edwin Arnold.

Footnote 346:

“Pensées,” LIV.

Footnote 347:

See the following chapter.

Footnote 348:

Compare John Müller: “Über die phantastischen Gesichtserscheinungen,”
Coblenz 1826; and Jung: “Occult Phenomena,” in Collected Papers on
Analytic Psychology.

Footnote 349:

Also the related doctrine of the Upanishad.

Footnote 350:

Bertschinger: “Illustrierte Halluzinationen,” _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p.
69.

Footnote 351:

How very important is the coronation and sun identification, is shown
not alone from countless old customs, but also from the corresponding
ancient metaphors in the religious speech: the Wisdom of Solomon v: 17:
“Therefore, they will receive a beautiful crown from the hand of the
Lord.” _I Peter_ v: 4: “Feed the flock of God ... and when the chief
shepherd shall appear ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not
away.”

In a church hymn of Allendorf it is said of the soul: “The soul is
liberated from all care and pain and in dying it has come to the _crown
of joy_; she stands as bride and queen in the _glitter of eternal
splendor_, at the side of the great king,” etc. In a hymn by Laurentius
Laurentii it is said (also of the soul): “The crown is entrusted to the
brides because they conquer.” In a song by Sacer we find the passage:
“Adorn my coffin with garlands just as a conqueror is adorned,—from
those springs of heaven, my soul has attained the eternally green crown:
the true glory of victory, coming from the son of God who has so cared
for me.” A quotation from the above-mentioned song of Allendorf is added
here, in which we have another complete expression of the primitive
psychology of the sun identification of men, which we met in the
Egyptian song of triumph of the ascending soul.

(Concerning the soul, continuation of the above passage:) “It [the soul]
sees a clear countenance [sun]: his [the sun’s] joyful loving nature now
restores it through and through: it is a _light in his light_.—Now the
_child can see the father_: He feels the gentle emotion of love. Now he
can understand the word of Jesus. He himself, the father, has loved you.
An unfathomable sea of benefits, an abyss of eternal waves of blessing
is disclosed to the enlightened spirit: he beholds the countenance of
God, and knows what signifies _the inheritor of God in light and the
co-heir of Christ_.—The feeble body rests on the earth: it sleeps until
Jesus awakens it. _Then will the dust become the sun_, which now is
covered by the dark cavern: Then shall we come together with all the
pious, who knows how soon, and will be for eternity with the Lord.” I
have emphasized the significant passages by italics: they speak for
themselves, so that I need add nothing.

Footnote 352:

In order to avoid misunderstanding I must add that this was absolutely
unknown to the patient.

Footnote 353:

The analysis of an eleven-year-old girl also confirms this. I gave a
report of this in the I Congrès International de Pédologie, 1911, in
Brussels.

Footnote 354:

The identity of the divine hero with the mystic is not to be doubted. In
a prayer written on papyrus to Hermes, it is said: σὺ γὰρ ἐγὼ καὶ ἐγὼ
σύ· τὸ σόν ὄνομα ἐμὸν καὶ τὸ ἐμὸν σὸν· ἐγὼ γὰρ εἰμι τὸ εἴθολόν σου (For
thou art I and I am thou, thy name is mine, and mine is thine; for I am
thy image). (Kenyon: Greek Papyrus, in the British Museum, 1893, p. 116,
Pap. CXXII, 2. Cited by Dieterich: “Mithrasliturgie,” p. 79.) The hero
as image of the libido is strikingly illustrated in the head of Dionysus
at Leiden (Roscher, I, Sp. 1128), where the hair rises like flame over
the head. He is—like a flame: “Thy savior will be a flame.” Firmicus
Maternus (“De Errore Prof. Relig.,” 104, p. 28) acquaints us with the
fact that the god was saluted as bridegroom, and “young light.” He
transmits the corrupt Greek sentence, δε νυνφε χαιρε νυνφε νεον φως,
with which he contrasts the Christian conception: “Nullum apud te lumen
est nec est aliquis qui sponsus mereatur audire: unum lumen est, unus
est sponsus. Nominum horum gratiam Christus accepit.” To-day Christ is
still our hero and the bridegroom of the soul. These attributes will be
confirmed in regard to Miss Miller’s hero in what follows.

Footnote 355:

The giving of a name is therefore of significance in the so-called
spiritual manifestations. See my paper, 1902, “Occult Phenomena,”
Collected Papers on Analytical Psychology.

Footnote 356:

The ancients recognized this demon as συνοπαδός, the companion and
follower.

Footnote 357:

A parallel to these phantasies are the well-known interpretations of the
Sella Petri of the pope.

Footnote 358:

When Freud called attention through his analytic researches to the
connection between excrements and gold, many ignorant persons found
themselves obliged to ridicule in an airy manner this connection. The
mythologists think differently about it. De Gubernatis says that
excrement and gold are always associated together. Grimm tells us of the
following magic charm: “If one wants money in his house the whole year,
one must eat lentils on New Year’s Day.” This notable connection is
explained simply through the physiological fact of the indigestibility
of lentils, which appear again in the form of coins. Thus one becomes a
mint.

Footnote 359:

A French father who naturally disagreed with me in regard to this
interest in his child mentioned, nevertheless, that when the child
speaks of cacao, he always adds “lit”; he means caca-au-lit.

Footnote 360:

Freud: _Jahrbuch_, Vol. I, p. 1. Jung: _Jahrbuch_, Vol. II, p. 33. See
third lecture delivered at Clark University, 1909.

Footnote 361:

I refer to the previous etymologic connection.

Footnote 362:

Compare Bleuler: _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 467.

Footnote 363:

“Genius and Insanity.”

Footnote 364:

Here again is the connection with antiquity, the infantile past.

Footnote 365:

This fact is unknown to me. It might be possible that in some way the
name of the legendary man who invented the cuneiform characters has been
preserved (as, for example, Sinlikiunnini as the poet of the Gilgamesh
epic). But I have not succeeded in finding anything of that sort.
However, Ashshurbanaplu or Asurbanipal has left behind that marvellous
cuneiform library, which was excavated in Kujundschik. Perhaps
“Asurubama” has something to do with this name. Further there comes into
consideration the name of Aholibamah, which we have met in Part I. The
word “Ahamarama” betrays equally some connections with Anah and
Aholibamah, those daughters of Cain with the sinful passion for the sons
of God. This possibility hints at Chiwantopel as the longed-for son of
God. (Did Byron think of the two sister whores, Ohola and Oholiba?
Ezeck. xxiii:4.)

Footnote 366:

The race does not part with its wandering sun-heroes. Thus it was
related of Cagliostro, that he once drove at the same time four white
horses out of a city from all the city gates simultaneously (Helios!).

Footnote 367:

Mysticism.

Footnote 368:

Agni, the fire, also hides himself at times in a cavern. Therefore he
must be brought forth again by generation from the cavity of the female
wood. Compare Kuhn: “Herabk. des Feuers.”

Footnote 369:

We = Allah.

Footnote 370:

The “two-horned.” According to the commentaries, this refers to
Alexander the Great, who in the Arabian legends plays nearly the same
rôle as the German Dietrich von Bern. The “two-horned” refers to the
strength of the sun-bull. Alexander is often found upon coins with the
horns of Jupiter Ammon. It is a question of identification of the ruler
around whom so many legends are clustered, with the sun of spring in the
signs of the bull and the ram. It is obvious that humanity had a great
need of effacing the personal and human from their heroes, so as finally
to make them, through a μετάστασις (eclipse), the equal of the sun, that
is to say, completely into a libido-symbol. If we thought like
Schopenhauer, then we would surely say, Libido-symbol. But if we thought
like Goethe, then we would say, Sun; for we exist, because the sun sees
us.

Footnote 371:

Vollers: “Chidher. Archiv für Religionswissenschaft,” p. 235, Vol. XII,
1909. This is the work which is my authority on the Koran commentaries.

Footnote 372:

Here the ascension of Mithra and Christ are closely related. See Part I.

Footnote 373:

A parallel is found in the Mithra mysteries! See below.

Footnote 374:

Parallel to this are the conversations of Mohammed with Elias, at which
the sacramental bread was served. In the New Testament the awkwardness
is restricted to the proposal of Peter. The infantile character of such
scenes is shown by similar features, thus by the gigantic stature of
Elias in the Koran, and also the tales of the commentary, in which it is
stated that Elias and Chidher met each year in Mecca, conversed and
shaved each other’s heads.

Footnote 375:

On the contrary, according to Matthew xvii: 11, John the Baptist is to
be understood as Elias.

Footnote 376:

Compare the Kyffhäuser legend.

Footnote 377:

Vollers: Ibid.

Footnote 378:

Another account says that Alexander had been in India on the mountain of
Adam with his “minister” Chidher.

Footnote 379:

These mythological equations follow absolutely the rule of dreams, where
the dreamer can be resolved into many analogous forms.

Footnote 380:

“He must grow, but I must waste away.”—_John_ iii: 30.

Footnote 381:

Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” p. 172.

Footnote 382:

The parallel between Hercules and Mithra may be drawn even more closely.
Like Hercules, Mithra is an excellent archer. Judging from certain
monuments, not only the youthful Hercules appears to be threatened by a
snake, but also Mithra as a youth. The meaning of the ἄθλος of Hercules
(the work) is the same as the Mithraic mystery of the conquering and
sacrifice of the bull.

Footnote 383:

These three scenes are represented in a row on the Klagenfurt monument.
Thus the dramatic connection of these must be surmised (Cumont: “Myst.
des Mithras”).

Footnote 384:

Also the triple crown.

Footnote 385:

The Christian sequence is John—Christ, Peter—Pope.

Footnote 386:

The immortality of Moses is proven by the parallel situation with Elias
in the transfiguration.

Footnote 387:

See Frobenius: “Das Zeitalter des Sonnengottes.”

Footnote 388:

Therefore the fish is the symbol of the “Son of God”; at the same time
the fish is also the symbol of the approaching world-cycle.

Footnote 389:

Riklin: “Wish Fulfilment and Symbolism.”

Footnote 390:

Inman: “Ancient Pagan and Modern Christian Symbolism.”

Footnote 391:

The amniotic membrane(?).

Footnote 392:

The Etrurian Tages, who sprang from the “freshly ploughed furrow,” is
also a teacher of wisdom. In the Litaolane myth of the Basutos, there is
a description of how a monster devoured all men and left only one woman,
who gave birth to a son, the hero, in a stable (instead of a cave: see
the etymology of this myth). Before she had arranged a bed for the
infant out of the straw, he was already grown and spoke “words of
wisdom.” The quick growth of the hero, a frequently recurring motive,
appears to mean that the birth and apparent childhood of the hero are so
extraordinary because his birth really means his rebirth, therefore he
becomes very quickly adapted to his hero rôle. Compare below.

Footnote 393:

Battle of Rê with the night serpent.

Footnote 394:

Matthew iii: 11.

Footnote 395:

“Das Gilgameshepos in der Weltliteratur,” Vol. I, p. 50.

Footnote 396:

The difference between this and the Mithra sacrifice seems to be
extraordinarily significant. The Dadophores are harmless gods of light
who do not participate in the sacrifice. The animal is lacking in the
sacrifice of Christ. Therefore there are two criminals who suffer the
same death. The scene is much more dramatic. The inner connection of the
Dadophores to Mithra, of which I will speak later, allows us to assume
the same relation of Christ to the criminals. The scene with Barabbas
betrays that Christ is the god of the ending year, who is represented by
one of the thieves, while the one of the coming year is free.

Footnote 397:

For example, the following dedication is found on a monument: D. I. M.
(Deo Invicto Mithrae) Cautopati. One discovers sometimes Deo Mithrae
Caute or Deo Mithrae Cautopati in a similar alternation as Deo Invicto
Mithrae—or sometimes Deo Invicto—or, merely, Invicto. It also appears
that the Dadophores are fitted with knife and bow, the attributes of
Mithra. From this it is to be concluded that the three figures represent
three different states of a single person. Compare Cumont: “Textes et
Monuments,” p. 208.

Footnote 398:

Of the threefold Mithra.

Footnote 399:

Cited by Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” p. 208.

Footnote 400:

Having expanded himself threefold, he departed from the sun.

Footnote 401:

Now these differences in the seasons refer to the Sun, which seems at
the winter solstice an infant, such as the Egyptians on a certain day
bring out of their sanctuaries; at the vernal equinox it is represented
as a youth. Later, at the summer solstice, its age is represented by a
full growth of beard, while at the last, the god is represented by the
gradually diminishing form of an old man.

Footnote 402:

Ibid.

Footnote 403:

Taurus and Scorpio are the equinoctial signs for the period from 4300 to
2150 B.C. These signs, long since superseded, were retained even in the
Christian era.

Footnote 404:

Under some circumstances, it is also sun and moon.

Footnote 405:

In order to characterize the individual and the all-soul, the personal
and the super-personal, Atman, a verse of the _Shvetâshvatara-Upanishad_
(Deussen) makes use of the following comparison:

              “Zwei schön beflügelte verbundne Freunde
              Umarmen einen und denselben Baum;
              Einer von ihnen speist die süsse Beere,
              Der andre schaut, nicht essend, nur herab.”

  (Two closely allied friends, beautifully winged, embrace one and the
  same tree; One of them eats the sweet berries, the other not eating
  merely looks downwards.)

Footnote 406:

Among the elements composing man, in the Mithraic liturgy, fire is
especially emphasized as the divine element, and described as τὸ εἰς
ἐμὴν κρᾶσιν θεοδώρητον (The divine gift in my composition). Dietrich:
Ibid., p. 58.

Footnote 407:

Threefold God.

Footnote 408:

It is sufficient to point to the loving interest which mankind and also
the God of the Old Testament has for the nature of the penis, and how
much depends upon it.

Footnote 409:

The testicles easily count as twins. Therefore in vulgar speech the
testicles are called the Siamese twins. (“Anthropophyteia,” VII, p. 20.
Quoted by Stekel: “Sprache des Traumes,” p. 169.)

Footnote 410:

“Recherches sur le culte, etc., de Vénus,” Paris, 1837. Quoted by Inman:
“Ancient Pagan and Modern Christian Symbolism,” New York, p. 4.

Footnote 411:

The androgynous element is not to be undervalued in the faces of Adonis,
Christ, Dionysus and Mithra, and hints at the bisexuality of the libido.
The smooth-shaven face and the feminine clothing of the Catholic priest
contain a very old female constituent from the Attis-Cybele cult.

Footnote 412:

Stekel (“Sprache des Traumes”) has again and again noted the Trinity as
a phallic symbol. For example, see p. 27.

Footnote 413:

Sun’s rays = Phalli.

Footnote 414:

In a Bakairi myth a woman appears, who has sprung from a corn mortar. In
a Zulu myth it is said: A woman is to catch a drop of blood in a vessel,
then close the vessel, put it aside for eight months and open it in the
ninth month. She follows the advice, opens the vessel in the ninth
month, and finds a child in it. (Frobenius: “Das Zeitalter des
Sonnengottes” [The Age of the Sun-God], I, p. 237.)

Footnote 415:

Inman: Ibid., p. 10, Plate IX.

Footnote 416:

Roscher: “Lexicon,” Sp. 2733/4. See section, Men.

Footnote 417:

A well-known sun animal, frequent as a phallic symbol.

Footnote 418:

Like Mithra and the Dadophores.

Footnote 419:

The castration in the service of the mother explains this quotation in a
very significant manner: Exod. iv: 25: “Then Zipporah took a sharp
stone, and cut off her son’s foreskin and cast it at his feet and said,
Surely, a bloody husband art thou to me.” This passage shows what
circumcision means.

Footnote 420:

Gilgamesh, Dionysus, Hercules, Christ, Mithra, and so on.

Footnote 421:

Compare with this, Graf: “R. Wagner im Fliegenden Holländer: Schriften
zur angewandten Seelenkunde.”

Footnote 422:

I have pointed out above, in reference to the Zosimos vision, that the
altar meant the uterus, corresponding to the baptismal font.


                               CHAPTER V

Footnote 423:

Freud: “Dream Interpretation.”

Footnote 424:

I am indebted to Dr. Abegg in Zürich for the knowledge of Indra and
Urvarâ, Domaldi and Râma.

Footnote 425:

Medieval Christianity also considered the Trinity as dwelling in the
womb of the holy Virgin.

Footnote 426:

“Symbolism,” Plate VII.

Footnote 427:

Another form of the same motive is the Persian idea of the tree of life,
which stands in the lake of rain, Vourukasha. The seeds of this tree
were mixed with water and by that the fertility of the earth was
maintained. “Vendîdâd,” 5, 57, says: The waters flow “to the lake
Vourukasha, down to the tree Hvâpa; there my trees of many kinds all
grow. I cause these waters to rain down as food for the pure man, as
fodder for the well-born cow. (Impregnation, in terms of the presexual
stage.) Another tree of life is the white Haoma, which grows in the
spring Ardvîçura, the water of life.” Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,”
I, 465, 467.

Footnote 428:

Excellent examples of this are given in the work of Rank, “The Myth of
the Birth of the Hero,” translated by Wm. White.

Footnote 429:

Shadows probably mean the soul, the nature of which is the same as
libido. Compare with this Part I.

Footnote 430:

But I must mention that Nork (“Realwörterbuch,” sub. Theben und Schiff)
pleads that Thebes is the ship city; his arguments are much attacked.
From among his arguments I emphasize a quotation from Diodorus (I, 57),
according to which Sesostris (whom Nork associates with Xisuthros) had
consecrated to the highest god in Thebes a vessel 280 els long. In the
dialogue of Lucius (Apuleius: “Metam.,” lib. II, 28), the night journey
in the sea was used as an erotic figure of speech: “Hac enim sitarchia
navigium Veneris indiget sola, ut in nocte pervigili et oleo lucerna et
vino calix abundet” (For the ship of Venus needs this provision in order
that during the night the lamp may abound with oil and the goblet with
wine). The union of the coitus motive with the motive of pregnancy is to
be found in the “night journey on the sea” of Osiris, who in his
mother’s womb copulated with his sister.

Footnote 431:

Very illuminating psychologically is the method and the manner in which
Jesus treats his mother, when he harshly repels her. Just as strong and
intense as this, has the longing for her imago grown in his unconscious.
It is surely not an accident that the name Mary accompanies him through
life. Compare the utterance of Matthew x: 35: “I have come to set a man
at variance with his father, a daughter with her mother. He who loves
father and mother more than me is not worthy of me.” This directly
hostile purpose, which calls to mind the legendary rôle of Bertran de
Born, is directed against the incestuous bond and compels man to
transfer his libido to the Saviour, who, dying, returning into his
mother and rising again, is the hero Christ.

Footnote 432:

Genitals.

Footnote 433:

The horns of the dragon have the following attributes: “They will prey
upon woman’s flesh and they will burn with fire.” The horn, a phallic
emblem, is in the unicorn the symbol of the Holy Ghost (Logos). The
unicorn is hunted by the archangel Gabriel, and driven into the lap of
the Virgin, by which was understood the immaculate conception. But the
horns are also sun’s rays, therefore the sun-gods are often horned. The
sun phallus is the prototype of the horn (sun wheel and phallus wheel),
therefore the horn is the symbol of power. Here the horns “burn with
fire” and prey upon the flesh; one recognizes in this a representation
of the pains of hell where souls were burnt by the fire of the libido
(unsatisfied longing). The harlot is “consumed” or burned by unsatisfied
longing (libido). Prometheus suffers a similar fate, when the eagle,
sun-bird (libido), tears his intestines: one might also say, that he was
pierced by the “horn.” I refer to the phallic meaning of the spear.

Footnote 434:

In the Babylonian underworld, for example. The souls have a feathery
coat like birds. See the Gilgamesh epic.

Footnote 435:

In a fourteenth-century Gospel at Bruges there is a miniature where the
“woman” lovely as the mother of God stands with half her body in a
dragon.

Footnote 436:

τὸ ἀρνίον, little ram, diminutive of the obsolete ἀρήν = ram. (In
Theophrastus it occurs with the meaning of “young scion.”) The related
word ἀρνίς designates a festival annually celebrated in honor of Linos,
in which the λίνος, the lament called Linos, was sung as a lamentation
for Linos, the new-born son of Psamathe and Apollo, torn to pieces by
dogs. The mother had exposed her child out of fear of her father
Krotopos. But for revenge Apollo sent a dragon, Poine, into Krotopos’
land. The oracle of Delphi commanded a yearly lament by women and
maidens for the dead Linos. A part of the honor was given to Psamathe.
The Linos lament is, as Herodotus shows (II, 79), identical with the
Phœnician, Cyprian and Egyptian custom of the Adonis-(Tammuz) lament. As
Herodotus observes, Linos is called Maneros in Egypt. Brugsch points out
that Maneros comes from the Egyptian cry of lamentation, _maa-n-chru_:
“come to the call.” Poine is characterized by her tearing the children
from the womb of all mothers. This ensemble of motives is found again in
the Apocalypse, xii: 1–5, where it treats of the woman, whose child was
threatened by a dragon but was snatched away into the heavens. The
child-murder of Herod is an anthropomorphism of this “primitive” idea.
The lamb means the son. (See Brugsch: “Die Adonisklage und das
Linoslied,” Berlin 1852.) Dieterich (Abraxas: “Studien zur
Religionsgeschichte des späteren Altertums,” 1891) refers for an
explanation of this passage to the myth of Apollo and Python, which he
reproduces as follows: “To Python, the son of earth, the great dragon,
it was prophesied that the son of Leto would kill him; Leto was pregnant
by Zeus: but Hera brought it about that she _could give birth only there
where the sun did not shine_. When Python saw that Leto was pregnant, he
began to pursue her in order to kill her, but Boreas brought Leto to
Poseidon. The latter brought her to Ortygia and covered the island with
the waves of the sea. When Python did not find Leto, he returned to
Parnassus. Leto brought forth upon the island thrown up by Poseidon. The
fourth day after the birth, Apollo took revenge and killed the Python.”
The birth upon the hidden island belongs to the motive of the “night
journey on the sea.” The typical character of the “island phantasy” has
for the first time been correctly perceived by Riklin (1912 _Jahrbuch_,
Vol. II, p. 246). A beautiful parallel for this is to be found, together
with the necessary incestuous phantasy material, in H. de Vere Stacpool:
“The Blue Lagoon.” A parallel to “Paul and Virginia.”

Footnote 437:

Revelation xxi: 2: “And the holy city, the new Jerusalem, I saw coming
down from the _heaven of God, prepared as a bride adorned for her
bridegroom_.”

Footnote 438:

The legend of Saktideva, in Somadeva Bhatta, relates that the hero,
after he had escaped from being devoured by a huge fish (terrible
mother), finally sees the golden city and marries his beloved princess
(Frobenius, p. 175).

Footnote 439:

In the Apocryphal acts of St. Thomas (2nd century) the church is taken
to be the virgin mother-spouse of Christ. In an invocation of the
apostle, it is said:

       Come, holy name of Christ, thou who art above all names.
       Come, power of the highest and greatest mercy,
       Come, dispenser of the greatest blessings,
       Come, gracious mother.
       Come, economy of the masculine.
       Come, woman, thou who disclosest the hidden mysteries....

In another invocation it is said:

        Come, greatest mercy,
        Come, spouse (literally community) of the male,
        Come, woman, thou who knowest the mystery of the elect,
        Come, woman, thou who showest the hidden things
        And who revealest the unspeakable things, holy
        Dove, thou who bringest forth the twin nestling,
        Come, mysterious mother, etc.

F. C. Conybeare: “Die jungfräuliche Kirche und die jungfräuliche
Mutter.” _Archiv für Religionswissenschaft_, IX, 77. The connection of
the church with the mother is not to be doubted, also the conception of
the mother as spouse. The virgin is necessarily introduced to hide the
incest idea. The “community with the male” points to the motive of the
continuous cohabitation. The “twin nestlings” refer to the old legend,
that Jesus and Thomas were twins. It plainly expresses the motive of the
Dioscuri. Therefore, doubting Thomas had to place his finger in the
wound at the side. Zinzendorf has correctly perceived the sexual
significance of this symbol that hints at the androgynous nature of the
primitive being (the libido). Compare the Persian legend of the twin
trees Meschia and Mechiane, as well as the motive of the Dioscuri and
the motive of cohabitation.

Footnote 440:

Compare Freud: “Dream Interpretation.” Also Abraham: “Dreams and Myths,”
pp. 22 f.

Footnote 441:

The sea is the symbol of birth.

Footnote 442:

_Isaiah_ xlviii:1. “Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by
the name of Israel and are come forth out of the waters of Judah.”

Footnote 443:

Wirth: “Aus orientalischen Chroniken.”—The Greek “Materia” is ὕλη, which
means wood and forest; it really means moist, from the Indo-Germanic
root _sū_ in ὕω, “to make wet, to have it rain”; ὑετός = rain; Iranian
_suth_ = sap, fruit, birth; Sanscrit _súrā_ = brandy; _sutus_ =
pregnancy; _sūte_, _sūyate_ = to generate; _sutas_ = son; _sūras_ =
soma; υἱός = son; (Sanscrit, _sūnús_; gothic, _sunus_).

Footnote 444:

Κοίμημα means cohabitation, κοιμητήριον bedchamber, hence coemeterium =
cemetery, enclosed fenced place.

Footnote 445:

Nork: “Realwörterbuch.”

Footnote 446:

In a myth of Celebes, a dove maiden who was caught in the manner of the
swan maiden myth, was called Utahagi after a white hair which grew on
its crown and in which there was magic strength. Frobenius, p. 307.

Footnote 447:

Referring to the phallic symbolism of the finger, see the remarks about
the Dactyli, Part II, Chap. I: I mention at this place the following
from a Bakairi myth: “Nimagakaniro devoured two finger bones, many of
which were in the house, because Oka used them for his arrow heads and
killed many Bakairi whose flesh he ate. The woman became pregnant from
the finger bone and only from this, not from Oka” (quoted by Frobenius,
p. 236).

Footnote 448:

Further proof for this in Prellwitz: “Griechische Etymologie.”

Footnote 449:

Siecke: “Der Gott Rudra in Rigveda”: _Archiv für Religionswissenschaft_,
Vol. I, p. 237.

Footnote 450:

The fig tree is the phallic tree. It is noteworthy that Dionysus planted
a fig tree at the entrance to Hades, just as “Phalli” are placed on
graves. The cyprus tree consecrated to Aphrodite grew to be entirely a
token of death, because it was placed at the door of the house of death.

Footnote 451:

Therefore the tree at times is also a representation of the sun. A
Russian riddle related to me by Dr. Van Ophuijsen reads: “What is the
tree which stands in the middle of the village and is visible in every
cottage?” Answer: “The sun and its light.” A Norwegian riddle reads:

               “A tree stands on the mountain of Billings,
               It bends over a lake,
               Its branches shine like gold:
               You won’t guess that to-day.

  In the evening the daughter of the sun collected the golden branches,
  which had been broken from the wonderful oak.

                     Bitterly weeps the little sun
                     In the apple orchard.
                     From the apple tree has fallen
                     The golden apple,
                     Do not weep, little sun,
                     God will make another
                     Of gold, of bronze, of silver.”

The picking of the apple from the paradise tree may be compared with the
fire theft, the drawing back of the libido from the mother. (See the
explanations which follow concerning the specific deed of the hero.)

Footnote 452:

The relation of the son to the mother was the psychologic basis of many
religions. In the Christian legend the relation of the son to the mother
is extraordinarily clear. Robertson (“Evangelical Myths”) has hit upon
the relation of Christ to the Marys, and he conjectures that this
relation probably refers to an old myth “where a god of Palestine,
perhaps of the name Joshua, appears in the changing relation of lover
and son towards a mythical Mary. This is a natural process in the oldest
theosophy and one which appears with variations in the myths of Mithra,
Adonis, Attis, Osiris and Dionysus, all of whom were brought into
relation (or combination) with mother goddesses and who appear either as
a consort or a feminine eidolon in so far as the mothers and consorts
were identified as occasion offered.”

Footnote 453:

Rank has pointed out a beautiful example of this in the myth of the swan
maiden. “Die Lohengrinsage: Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunde.”

Footnote 454:

Muther (“Geschichte der Malerei,” Vol. II) says in the chapter: “The
First Spanish Classic”: “Tieck once wrote: Sexuality is the great
mystery of our being. Sensuality is the first moving wheel in our
machinery. It stirs our being and makes it joyous and living. Everything
we dream of as beautiful and noble is included here. Sexuality and
sensuousness are the spirit of music, of painting and of all art. All
wishes of mankind rotate around this center like moths around a burning
light. The sense of beauty and the feeling for art are only other
expressions of it. They signify nothing more than the impulse of mankind
towards expression. I consider devoutness itself as a diverted channel
of the sexual desire.” Here it is openly declared that one should never
forget when judging the ancient ecclesiastic art that the effort to
efface the boundaries between earthly and divine love, to blend them
into each other imperceptibly, has always been the guiding thought, the
strongest factor in the propaganda of the Catholic church.

Footnote 455:

That which is born of the flesh is flesh and that which is born of the
spirit is spirit; the spirit bloweth where it listeth.

Footnote 456:

We will not discuss here the reasons for the strength of the phantasy.
But it does not seem difficult to me to imagine what sort of powers are
hidden behind the above formula.

Footnote 457:

Lactantius says: “When all know that it is customary for certain animals
to conceive through wind and breath of air, why should any one consider
it miraculous for a virgin to be impregnated by the spirit of God?”
Robertson: “Evang. Myth.,” p. 31.

Footnote 458:

Therefore the strong emphasis upon affiliation in the New Testament.

Footnote 459:

The mystic feelings of the nearness of God; the so-called personal inner
experience.

Footnote 460:

The sexual mawkishness is everywhere apparent in the lamb symbolism and
the spiritual love-songs to Jesus, the bridegroom of the soul.

Footnote 461:

Usener: “Der heilige Tychon,” 1907.

Footnote 462:

Compare W. P. Knight: “Worship of Priapus.”

Footnote 463:

Or in the compensating organizations, which appear in the place of
religion.

Footnote 464:

The condition was undoubtedly ideal for early times, where mankind was
more infantile in general: and it still is ideal for that part of
humanity which is infantile; how large is that part!

Footnote 465:

Compare Freud: _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 1.

Footnote 466:

Here it is not to be forgotten we are moving entirely in the territory
of psychology, which in no way is allied to transcendentalism, either in
positive or negative relation. It is a question here of a relentless
fulfilment of the standpoint of the theory of cognition, established by
Kant, not merely for the theory, but, what is more important, for the
practice. One should avoid playing with the infantile image of the
world, because all this tends only to separate man from his essential
and highest ethical goal, moral autonomy. The religious symbol should be
retained after the inevitable obliteration of certain antiquated
fragments, as postulate or as transcendent theory, and also as taught in
precepts, but is to be filled with new meaning according to the demand
of the culture of the present day. But this theory must not become for
the “adult” a positive creed, an illusion, which causes reality to
appear to him in a false light. Just as man is a dual being, having an
intellectual and an animal nature, so does he appear to need two forms
of reality, the reality of culture, that is, the symbolic transcendent
theory, and the reality of nature which corresponds to our conception of
the “true reality.” In the same measure that the true reality is merely
a figurative interpretation of the appreciation of reality, the
religious symbolic theory is merely a figurative interpretation of
certain endopsychic apperceptions. But one very essential difference is
that a transcendental support, independent in duration and condition, is
assured to the transubjective reality through the best conceivable
guarantees, while for the psychologic phenomena a transcendental support
of subjective limitation and weakness must be recognized as a result of
compelling empirical data. Therefore true reality is one that is
relatively universally valid; the psychologic reality, on the contrary,
is merely a functional phenomenon contained in an epoch of human
civilization. Thus does it appear to-day from the best informed
empirical standpoint. If, however, the psychologic were divested of its
character of a biologic epiphenomenon in a manner neither known nor
expected by me, and thereby was given the place of a physical entity,
then the psychologic reality would be resolved into the true reality; or
much more, it would be reversed, because then the psychologic would lay
claim to a greater worth, for the ultimate theory, because of its
directness.

Footnote 467:

“De Isid. et Osir.”

Footnote 468:

In the fourth place Isis was born in absolute humidity.

Footnote 469:

The great beneficent king, Osiris.

Footnote 470:

Erman: “Aegypten,” p. 360.

Footnote 471:

Here I must again recall that I give to the word “incest” more
significance than properly belongs to the term. Just as libido is the
onward driving force, so incest is in some manner the backward urge into
childhood. For the child, it cannot be spoken of as incest. Only for the
adult who possesses a completely formed sexuality does the backward urge
become incest, because he is no longer a child but possesses a sexuality
which cannot be permitted a regressive application.

Footnote 472:

Compare Frobenius: “Das Zeitalter des Sonnengottes.”

Footnote 473:

Compare the “nightmare legends” in which the mare is a beautiful woman.

Footnote 474:

This recalls the phallic columns placed in the temples of Astarte. In
fact, according to one version, the wife of the king was named Astarte.
This symbol brings to mind the crosses, fittingly called έγκολπια
(pregnant crosses), which conceal a secret reliquary.

Footnote 475:

Spielrein (_Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 358) points out numerous indications
of the motive of dismemberment in a demented patient. Fragments of the
most varied things and materials were “cooked” or “burnt.” “The ash can
become man.” The patient saw children dismembered in glass coffins. In
addition, the above-mentioned “washing,” “cleaning,” “cooking” and
“burning” has, besides the coitus motive, also the pregnancy motive; the
latter probably in a predominating measure.

Footnote 476:

Later offshoots of this primitive theory of the origin of children are
contained in the doctrines of Karma, and the conception of the Mendelian
theory of heredity is not far off. One only has to realize that all
apperceptions are subjectively conditioned.

Footnote 477:

Demeter assembled the limbs of the dismembered Dionysus and from them
produced the god anew.

Footnote 478:

Compare Diodorus: III, 62.

Footnote 479:

Yet to be added is the fact that the cynocephalic Anubis as the restorer
of the corpse of Osiris (also genius of the dog star) had a compensatory
significance. In this significance he appears upon many sarcophagi. The
dog is also a regular companion of the healing Asclepius. The following
quotation from Petronius best supports the Creuzer hypothesis (“Sat.,”
c. 71): “Valde te rogo, ut secundum pedes statuae meae catellam
pingas—ut mihi contingat tuo beneficio post mortem vivere” (I beseech
you instantly to fasten beside the feet of my statue a dog, so that
because of your beneficence I may attain to life after death). See Nork:
Ibid., about dog.

Moreover, the relation of the dog to the dog-headed Hecate, the goddess
of the underworld, hints at its being the symbol of rebirth. She
received as Canicula a sacrificial dog to keep away the pest. Her close
relation to Artemis as goddess of the moon permits her opposition to
fertility to be glimpsed. Hecate, is also the first to bring to Demeter
the news of her stolen child (the rôle of Anubis!). Also the goddess of
birth Ilithyia received sacrifices of dogs, and Hecate herself is, on
occasions, goddess of marriage and birth.

Footnote 480:

Frobenius (Ibid., p. 393) observes that frequently the gods of fire
(sun-heroes) lack a member. He gives the following parallel: “Just as
the god wrenches out an arm from the ogre (giant), so does Odysseus
pluck out the eye of the noble Polyphemus, whereupon the sun creeps up
mysteriously into the sky. Might the fire-making, twisting and wrenching
out of the arm be connected?” This question is by this clearly illumined
if we assume, corresponding to the train of thought of the ancients,
that the wrenching out of the arm is really a castration. (The symbol of
the robbery of the force of life.) It is an act corresponding to the
Attis castration because of the mother. From this renunciation, which is
really a symbolic mother incest, arises the discovery of fire, as
previously we have already suspected. Moreover, mention must be made of
the fact that to wrench out an arm, means first of all merely
“overpowering,” and on that account can happen to the hero as well as to
his opponent. (Compare, for examples, Frobenius: Ibid., pp. 112, 395.)

Footnote 481:

Compare especially the description of the cup of Thebes.

Footnote 482:

Professor Freud has expressed in a personal discussion the idea that a
further determinate for the motive of the dissimilar brothers is to be
found in the elementary observance towards birth and the after-birth. It
is an exotic custom to treat the placenta as a child!

Footnote 483:

Brugsch: “Religion und Mythologie der alten Aegypter,” p. 354.

Footnote 484:

Ibid., p. 310.

Footnote 485:

In the conception of Âtman there is a certain fluid quality in so far as
he really can be identified with Purusha of the Rigveda. “Purusha covers
all the places of the earth, flowing about it ten fingers high.”

Footnote 486:

Brugsch: Ibid., p. 112.

Footnote 487:

In Thebes, where the chief god is Chnum, the latter represents the
breath of the wind in his cosmic component, from which later on “the
spirit of God floating over the waters” has developed; the primitive
idea of the cosmic parents, who lie pressed together until the son
separates them. (Compare the symbolism of Âtman above.)

Footnote 488:

Brugsch: Ibid., p. 128.

Footnote 489:

Servian song from Grimm’s “Mythology,” II, p. 544.

Footnote 490:

Frobenius: Ibid.

Footnote 491:

Compare the birth of the Germanic Aschanes, where rock, tree and water
are present at the scene of birth. Chidher too was found sitting on the
earth, the ground around covered with flowers.

Footnote 492:

Most singularly even in this quotation, V. 288, the description is found
of Sleep sitting high up in a pine tree. “There he sat surrounded by
branches covered with thorny leaves, like the singing bird, who by night
flutters through the mountains.” It appears as if the motive belongs to
a hierosgamos. Compare also the magic net with which Hephaestos enfolds
Ares and Aphrodite “in flagranti” and kept them for the sport of the
gods.

Footnote 493:

The rite of enchaining the statues of Hercules and the Tyrian Melkarth
is related to this also. The Cabiri too were wrapt in coverings.
Creuzer: “Symbolik,” II, 350.

Footnote 494:

Fick: “Indogermanisches Wörterbuch,” I, p. 132.

Footnote 495:

Compare the “resounding sun.”

Footnote 496:

The motive of the “striking rocks” belongs also to the motive of
devouring (Frobenius: Ibid., p. 405). The hero in his ship must pass
between two rocks which strike together. (Similar to the biting door, to
the tree trunk which snaps together.) In the passage, generally the tail
of the bird is pinched off (or the “poop” of the ship, etc.); the
castration motive is once more clearly revealed here, for the castration
takes the place of mother incest. The castration is a substitution for
coitus. Scheffel employs this idea in his well-known poem: “A herring
loved an oyster, etc.” The poem ends with the oyster biting off the
herring’s head for a kiss. The doves which bring Zeus ambrosia have also
to pass through the rocks which strike together. The “doves” bring the
food of immortality to Zeus by means of incest (entrance into the
mother) very similar to Freya’s apples (breasts). Frobenius also
mentions the rocks or caves which open only at a magic word and are very
closely connected with the rocks which strike together. Most
illuminating in this respect is a South African myth (Frobenius, p.
407): “One must call the rock by name and cry loudly: Rock Utunjambili,
open, so that I may enter.” But the rock answers when it will not open
to the call. “The rock will not open to children, it will open to the
swallows which fly in the air!” The remarkable thing is, that no human
power can open the rock, only a formula has that power—or a bird. This
wording merely says that the opening of the rock is an undertaking which
cannot really be accomplished, but which one wishes to accomplish.

(In Middle High German, to wish is really “to have the power to create
something extraordinary.”) When a man dies, then only the wish that he
might live remains, an unfulfilled wish, a fluttering wish, wherefore
souls are birds. The soul is wholly only libido, as is illustrated in
many parts of this work; it is “to wish.” Thus the helpful bird, who
assists the hero in the whale to come again into the light, who opens
the rocks, is the wish for rebirth. (For the bird as a wish, see the
beautiful painting by Thoma, where the youth longingly stretches out his
arms to the birds who pass over his head.)

Footnote 497:

Melian Virgins.

Footnote 498:

Grimm: “Mythology,” I, p. 474.

Footnote 499:

In Athens there was a family of Αἰγειρότομοι = hewn from poplars.

Footnote 500:

Hermann: “Nordische Mythologie,” p. 589.

Footnote 501:

Pregnant.

Footnote 502:

Javanese tribes commonly set up their images of God in an artificial
cavity of a tree. This fits in with the “little hole” phantasy of
Zinzendorf and his sect. See Pfister: “Frömmigkeit des Grafen von
Zinzendorf.” In a Persian myth, the white Haoma is a divine tree,
growing in the lake Vourukasha, the fish Khar-mâhî circles protectingly
around it and defends it against the toad Ahriman. It gives eternal
life, children to women, husbands to girls and horses to men. In the
Minôkhired the tree is called “the preparer of the corpse” (Spiegel:
“Erân. Altertumskunde,” II, 115).

Footnote 503:

Ship of the sun, which accompanies the sun and the soul over the sea of
death to the rising.

Footnote 504:

Brugsch: Ibid., p. 177.

Footnote 505:

Similarly _Isaiah_ li: 1: “... look unto the rock whence ye are hewn,
and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.” Further proof is found
in A. von Löwis of Menar: “Nordkaukasische Steingeburtssagen,” _Archiv
für Religionswissenschaft_, XIII, p. 509.

Footnote 506:

Grimm: “Mythology,” I, p. 474.

Footnote 507:

“Das Kreuz Christi. Rel.-hist.-kirchl.-archaeol. Untersuchungen,” 1875.

Footnote 508:

The legend of Seth is found in Jubinal: “Mystères inédits du XV.
siècle,” Part II, p. 16. Quoted from Zöckler: Ibid., p. 241.

Footnote 509:

The guilt is as always, whenever possible, thrown upon the mother. The
Germanic sacred trees are also under the law of an absolute taboo: no
leaf may be taken from them, and nothing may be picked from the ground
upon which their shadows fall.

Footnote 510:

According to the German legend (Grimm: Vol. II, p. 809), the redeeming
hero will be born when the tree, which now grows as a weak shoot from
the wall, has become large, and when from its wood the cradle can be
made in which the hero can be rocked. The formula reads: “A linden shall
be planted, which shall bear on high two boughs from the wood of which a
“poie” shall be made; the child who will be the first to lie therein is
destined to be taken by the sword from life to death, and then salvation
will enter in.” In the Germanic legends, the appearance of a future
event is connected most remarkably with a budding tree. Compare with
this the designation of Christ as a “branch” or a “rod.”

Footnote 511:

Herein the motive of the “helpful bird” is apparent. Angels are really
birds. Compare the bird clothing of the souls of the underworld, “soul
birds.” In the sacrificium Mithriacum, the messenger of the gods (the
“angel”) is a raven, the winged Hermes, etc.

Footnote 512:

See Frobenius: Ibid.

Footnote 513:

The close connection between δελφίς = Dolphin and δελφύς = uterus is
emphasized. In Delphi there is the cavity in the earth and the Tripod
δελφινίς = a delphic table with three feet in the form of a Dolphin. See
in the last chapter Melicertes upon the Dolphin and the fiery sacrifice
of Melkarth.

Footnote 514:

See the comprehensive collection of Jones. On the nightmare.

Footnote 515:

Riklin: “Wish Fulfilment and Symbolism in Fairy Tales.”

Footnote 516:

Laistner: “Das Rätsel der Sphinx.”

Footnote 517:

Freud: _Jahrbuch_, Vol. I, June: “Mental Conflicts in Children”:
Collected Papers on Analytical Psychology.

Footnote 518:

“Epistola de ara ad Noviomagum reperta,” p. 25. Quoted by Grimm:
“Mythology,” Vol. II.

Footnote 519:

Even to-day the country people drive off these nymphs (mother goddesses,
Maira) by throwing a bone of the head of a horse upon the roof—bones of
this kind can often be seen throughout the land on the farmhouses of the
country people. By night, however, they are believed to ride at the time
of the first sleep, and they are believed to tire out their horses by
long journeys.

Footnote 520:

Grimm: Ibid., Vol. II, p. 1041.

Footnote 521:

Compare with that the horses whose tread causes springs to flow.

Footnote 522:

Compare Herrmann: “Nord. Myth.,” p. 64, and Fick: “Vergleich. Wörterb.
d. indogerm. Sprache,” Vol. I.

Footnote 523:

Parallel is the mantic significance of the delphic chasm, Mîmir’s brook,
etc. “Abyss of Wisdom,” see last chapter. Hippolytos, with whom his
stepmother was enamoured, was placed after death with the wise nymph,
Egeria.

Footnote 524:

That these matrons should declare by lots whether it would be to their
advantage or not to engage in battle.

Footnote 525:

Example in Bertschinger: _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, Part I.

Footnote 526:

Compare the exotic myths given by Frobenius (“Zeitalter des
Sonnengottes”), where the belly of the whale is clearly the land of
death.

Footnote 527:

One of the fixed peculiarities of the Mar is that he can only get out of
the hole, through which he came in. This motive belongs evidently as the
projected wish motive in the rebirth myth.

Footnote 528:

According to Gressmann: “Altorient. Text. und Bild.,” Vol. I, p. 4.

Footnote 529:

Abyss of wisdom, book of wisdom, source of phantasies. See below.

Footnote 530:

Cleavage of the mother, see Kaineus; also rift, chasm = division of the
earth, and so on.

Footnote 531:

“Schöpfung und Chaos.” Göttingen, 1895, p. 30.

Footnote 532:

Brugsch: Ibid., p. 161.

Footnote 533:

“In a Pyramid text, which depicts the battle of the dead Pharaoh for the
dominance of heaven, it reads: Heaven weeps, the stars tremble, the
guards of the gods tremble and their servants flee, when they see the
king rise as a spirit, as a god, who lives upon his fathers and conquers
his mothers.” Cited by Dieterich: “Mithrasliturgy,” p. 100.

Footnote 534:

Book II, p. 61.

Footnote 535:

By Ares, the Egyptian Typhon is probably meant.

Footnote 536:

In the Polynesian Maui myth, the act of the sun-hero is very plain: he
robs his mother of her girdle. The robbery of the veil in myths of the
type of the swan maiden has the same significance. In an African myth of
Joruba, the sun-hero simply ravishes his mother (Frobenius).

Footnote 537:

The previously mentioned myth of Halirrhotios, who destroyed himself
when he wished to cut down the holy tree of Athens, the Moria, contains
the same psychology, also the priestly castration (Attis castration) in
the service of the great mother. The ascetic self-torture in
Christianity has its origin, as is self-evident, in these sources
because the Christian form of symbol means a very intensive regression
to the mother incest.

Footnote 538:

The tearing off from the tree of life is just this sin.

Footnote 539:

Compare Kuhn: “Herabkunft des Feuers.”

Footnote 540:

Nork: “Wörterbuch s. v. Mistel.”

Footnote 541:

Therefore in England mistletoe boughs were hung up at Christmas.
Mistletoe as rod of life. Compare Aigremont: “Volkserotik und
Pflanzenwelt.”

Footnote 542:

Just as the tree has the phallic nature as well as a maternal
significance, so in myths the demonic old woman (she may be favorable or
malicious) often has phallic attributes, for example, a long toe, a long
tooth, long lips, long fingers, pendulous breasts, large hands, feet,
and so on. This mixture of male and female motive has reference to the
fact that the old woman is a libido symbol like the tree, generally
determined as maternal. The bisexuality of the libido is expressed in
its clearest form in the idea of the three witches, who collectively
possessed but one eye and one tooth. This idea is directly parallel to
the dream of a patient, who represented her libido as twins, one of
which is a box, the other a bottle-like object, for eye and tooth
represent male and female genitals. Relative to eye in this connection,
see especially the Egyptian myths: referring to tooth, it is to be
observed that Adonis (fecundity) died by a boar’s tooth, like Siegfried
by Hagen’s spear: compare with this the Veronese Priapus, whose phallus
was bitten by a snake. Tooth in this sense, like the snake, is a
“negative” phallus.

Footnote 543:

Compare Grimm: Vol. II, Chap, iv, p. 802. The same motive in another
application is found in a Low-Saxon legend: Once a young ash tree grew
unnoticed in the wood. Each New Year’s Eve a white knight upon a white
horse rides up to cut down the young shoot. At the same time a black
knight arrives and engages him in combat. After a lengthy conflict, the
white knight succeeds in overcoming the black knight and the white
knight cuts down the young tree. But sometime the white knight will be
unsuccessful, then the ash will grow, and when it becomes large enough
to allow a horse to be tied under it, then a powerful king will come and
a tremendous battle will occur (destruction of the world).

Footnote 544:

Chantepie de la Saussaye: “Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte,” Vol. II,
p. 185.

Footnote 545:

Further examples in Frobenius: Ibid., passim.

Footnote 546:

See Jensen: “Gilgameshepos.”

Footnote 547:

In a Schlesian passionale of the fifteenth century Christ dies on the
same tree which was connected with Adam’s sin. Cited from Zöckler:
Ibid., p. 241.

Footnote 548:

For example, animal skins were hung on the sacrificial trees and
afterwards spears were thrown at them.

Footnote 549:

“Geschichte der amerikanischen Urreligionen,” p. 498.

Footnote 550:

Stephens: “Central America” (cited by Müller: Ibid., p. 498).

Footnote 551:

Zöckler: “Das Kreuz Christi,” p. 34.

Footnote 552:

H. H. Bancroft: “Native Races of the Pacific States of North America,”
II, 506. (Cited by Robertson: “Evang. Myths,” p. 139.)

Footnote 553:

Rossellini: “Monumenti dell’ Egitto, etc.” Tom. 3. Tav. 23. (Cited by
Robertson: Ibid., p. 142.)

Footnote 554:

Zöckler: Ibid., p. 7. In the representation of the birth of a king in
Luxor one sees the following: The logos and messenger of the gods, the
bird-headed Thoth, makes known to the maiden Queen Mautmes that she is
to give birth to a son. In the following scene, Kneph and Athor hold the
Crux ansata to her mouth so that she may be impregnated by this in a
spiritual (symbolic) manner. Sharp: “Egyptian Mythology,” p. 18. (Cited
by Robertson: “Evangelical Myths,” p. 43.)

Footnote 555:

The statues of the phallic Hermes used as boundary stones were often in
the form of a cross with the head pointed (W. Payne Knight: “Worship of
Priapus,” p. 30). In Old English the cross is called rod.

Footnote 556:

Robertson (Ibid., p. 140) mentions the fact that the Mexican priests and
sacrificers clothed themselves in the skin of a slain woman, and placed
themselves with arms stretched out like a cross before the god of war.

Footnote 557:

“Indian Antiquities,” VI, 49.

Footnote 558:

The primitive Egyptian cross form is meant: Τ.

Footnote 559:

Zöckler: Ibid., p. 19. The bud is plainly phallic. See the
above-mentioned dream of the young woman.

Footnote 560:

I am indebted for my information about these researches to Professor
Fiechter of Stuttgart.

Footnote 561:

Zöckler: Ibid., p. 33.

Footnote 562:

The sacrifice is submerged in the water, that is, in the mother.

Footnote 563:

Compare later the moon as gathering place of souls (the devouring
mother).

Footnote 564:

Compare here what Abraham has to say in reference to pupilla (“Dreams
and Myths”).

Footnote 565:

Retreat of Rê upon the heavenly cow. In a Hindoo rite of purification,
the penitent must creep through an artificial cow in order to be born
anew.

Footnote 566:

Schultze: “Psychologie der Naturvölker.” Leipzig 1900, p. 338.

Footnote 567:

Brugsch: Ibid., p. 290.

Footnote 568:

One need not be amazed at this formula because it is the animal in us,
the primitive forces of which appear in religion. In this connection
Dieterich’s words (“Mithrasliturgie,” p. 108) take on an especially
important aspect. “The old thoughts come _from below_ in new force in
the history of religion. The revolution _from below_ creates a new life
of religion in primitive indestructible forms.”

Footnote 569:

Dispute between Mary and the Cross in R. Morris: “Legends of the Holy
Rood.” London 1871.

Footnote 570:

A very beautiful representation of the blood-red sun sinking into the
sea.

Footnote 571:

Jesus appears here as branch and bud in the tree of life. Compare here
the interesting reference in Robertson: “Evangelical Myths,” p. 51, in
regard to “Jesus, the Nazarene,” a title which he derives from Nazar or
Netzer = branch.

Footnote 572:

In Greece, the pale of torture, on which the criminal was stretched or
punished, was termed ἑκάτη (Hecate), the subterranean mother of death.

Footnote 573:

Diez: “Etym. Wörterbuch der romanischen Sprachen,” p. 90.


                               CHAPTER VI

Footnote 574:

Witches easily change themselves into horses, therefore the nail-marks
of the horseshoe may be seen upon their hands. The devil rides on
witch-horses, priests’ cooks are changed after death into horses, etc.
Negelein, _Zeitschrift des Vereines für Volkskunde_, XI, p. 406.

Footnote 575:

Just so does the mythical ancient king Tahmuraht ride upon Ahriman, the
devil.

Footnote 576:

The she-asses and their foals might belong to the Christian sun myth,
because the Zodiacal sign Cancer (Summer solstice) was designated in
antiquity as an ass and its young. (Compare Robertson: “Evangelical
Myths,” p. 19.)

Footnote 577:

Also a centaur.

Footnote 578:

Compare the exhaustive presentation of this theme in Jähn’s “Ross und
Reiter.”

Footnote 579:

Sleipnir is eight-footed.

Footnote 580:

Negelein: Ibid., p. 412.

Footnote 581:

Negelein: Ibid., p. 419.

Footnote 582:

I have since learned of a second exactly similar case.

Footnote 583:

Come, O Dionysus, in thy temple of Elis, come with the Graces into thy
holy temple: come in sacred frenzy with the bull’s foot.

Footnote 584:

Preller: “Griech. Mythologie,” I, I, p. 432.

Footnote 585:

See further examples in Aigremont: “Fuss- und Schuhsymbolik.”

Footnote 586:

Aigremont: Ibid., p. 17.

Footnote 587:

Negelein: Ibid., p. 386.

Footnote 588:

Ample proofs of the Centaurs as wind gods are to be found in E. H.
Meyer: “Indogermanische Mythen,” p. 447.

Footnote 589:

This is an especial motive, which must have something typical in it. My
patient (“Psychology of Dementia Praecox,” p. 165) also declared that
her horses had “half-moons” under their skin, like “little curls.” In
the songs of Rudra of the Rigveda, of the boar Rudra it is said that his
hair was “wound up in the shape of shells.” Indra’s body is covered with
eyes.

Footnote 590:

This change results from a world catastrophe. In mythology the verdure
and the upward striving of the tree of life signify also the
turning-point in the succession of the ages.

Footnote 591:

Therefore the lion was killed by Samson, who later harvested the honey
from the body. The end of summer is the plenteousness of the autumn. It
is a close parallel to the sacrificium Mithriacum. For Samson, see
Steinthal: “Die Sage von Simson,” _Zeitschrift für Völkerpsych._, Vol.
II.

Footnote 592:

The present time is indicated by the head of the lion—because his
condition is strong and impetuous.

Footnote 593:

Time is thought by the wickedest people to be a divinity who deprives
willing people of essential being; by good men it is considered to be
the Cause of the things of the world, but to the wisest and best it does
not seem time, but God.

Footnote 594:

Philo: “In Genesim,” I, 100. (Cited by Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” I,
p. 82.)

Footnote 595:

Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,” Vol. II, p. 193. In the writings
ascribed to Zoroaster, Περὶ Φύσεως, the Ananke, the necessity of fate,
is represented by the air. Cumont: Ibid., I, p. 87.

Footnote 596:

Spielrein’s patient (_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 394) speaks of horses, who eat
men, also exhumed bodies.

Footnote 597:

Negelein: Ibid., p. 416.

Footnote 598:

“Fight,” she said, “and fight bravely, for I will not give away an inch
nor turn my back. Face to face, come on if you are a man! Strike home,
do your worst and die! The battle this day is without quarter ... till,
weary in body and mind, we lie powerless and gasping for breath in each
other’s arms.”

Footnote 599:

P. Thomas a Villanova Wegener: “Das wunderbare äussere und innere Leben
der Dienerin Gottes Anna Catherina Emmerich.” Dülmen i. W. 1891.

Footnote 600:

The heart of the mother of God is pierced by a sword.

Footnote 601:

Corresponding to the idea in Psalm xi:2, “For lo, the wicked bend their
bow, they make ready their arrow upon the string, that they may privily
shoot at the upright in heart.”

Footnote 602:

K. E. Neumann: “The Speeches of Gautama Buddha,” translated from the
German collection of the fragments of Suttanipāto of the Pāli-Kanon.
München 1911.

Footnote 603:

With the same idea of an endogenous pain Theocritus (27, 28) calls the
birth throes “Arrows of the Ilithyia.” In the sense of a wish the same
comparison is found in Jesus Sirach 19:12. “When a word penetrates a
fool it is the same as if an arrow pierced his loins.” That is to say,
it gives him no rest until it is out.

Footnote 604:

One might be tempted to say that these were merely figuratively
expressed coitus scenes. But that would be a little too strong and an
unjustifiable accentuation of the material at issue. We cannot forget
that the saints have, figuratively, taught the painful domestification
of the brute. The result of this, which is the progress of civilization,
has also to be recognized as a motive for this action.

Footnote 605:

Apuleius (“Metam.,” Book II, 31) made use of the symbolism of bow and
arrow in a very drastic manner, “Ubi primam sagittam saevi Cupidinis in
ima praecordia mea delapsam excepi, arcum meum en! Ipse vigor attendit
et oppido formido, ne nervus rigoris nimietate rumpatur” (When I pulled
out the first arrow of fierce Cupid that had entered into my inmost
breast, behold my bow! Its very vigor stretches it and makes me fear
lest the string be broken by the excessive tautness).

Footnote 606:

Thus the plague-bringing Apollo. In Old High German, arrow is called
“strala” (_strahlen_ = rays).

Footnote 607:

Spielrein’s patient (_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 371) has also the idea of the
cleavage of the earth in a similar connection. “Iron is used for the
purpose of penetrating into the earth ... with iron man can ... create
men ... the earth is split, burst open, man is divided ... is severed
and reunited. In order to make an end of the burial of the living, Jesus
Christ calls his disciples to penetrate into the earth.”

The motive of “cleavage” is of general significance. The Persian hero
Tishtriya, who also appeared as a white horse, opens the rain lake, and
thus makes the earth fruitful. He is called Tîr = arrow. He was also
represented as feminine, with a bow and arrow. Mithra with his arrow
shot the water from the rock, so as to end the drought. The knife is
sometimes found stuck in the earth. In Mithraic monuments sometimes it
is the sacrificial instrument which kills the bull. (Cumont: Ibid., pp.
115, 116, 165.)

Footnote 608:

The result is doubtful: the body borne down by the weight of the forest
is carried into empty Tartaros: Ampycides denies this: from out of the
midst of the mass, he sees a bird with tawny feathers issue into the
liquid air.

Footnote 609:

Spielrein’s patient also states that she has been shot through by God.
(3 shots:) “then came a resurrection of the spirit.” This is the
symbolism of introversion.

Footnote 610:

This is also represented mythologically in the legend of Theseus and
Peirithoos, who wished to capture the subterranean Proserpina. With this
aim they enter a chasm in the earth in the grove Kolonos, in order to
get down to the underworld; when they were below they wished to rest,
but being enchanted they hung on the rocks, that is to say, they
remained fixed in the mother and were therefore lost for the upperworld.
Later Theseus was freed by Hercules (revenge of Horus for Osiris), at
which time Hercules appears in the rôle of the death-conquering hero.

Footnote 611:

This formula applies most directly to dementia praecox.

Footnote 612:

See Roscher: s. v. Philoktetes, Sp. 2318, 15.

Footnote 613:

When the Russian sun-hero Oleg stepped on the skull of the slain horse,
a serpent came out of it and bit him on the foot. Then he became sick
and died. When Indra in the form of Çyena, the falcon, stole the soma
drink, Kriçanu, the herdsman, wounded him in his foot with his arrow
(“Rigveda,” I, 155; IV, 322).

Footnote 614:

Similar to the Lord of the Grail who guards the chalice, the mother
symbol. The myth of Philoctetes is taken from a more involved
connection, the Hercules myth. Hercules has two mothers, the benevolent
Alcmene and the pursuing Hera (Lamia), from whose breast he has absorbed
immortality. Hercules conquered Hera’s serpent while yet in the cradle;
that is to say, conquered the “terrible mother,” the Lamia. But from
time to time Hera sent to him attacks of madness, in one of which he
killed his children (Lamia motive). According to an interesting
tradition, this deed occurred at the moment when Hercules refused to
perform a great act in the service of Eurystheus. As a result of the
refusal, the libido, in readiness for the work, regressed in a typical
manner to the unconscious mother-imago, which resulted in madness (as
to-day), during which Hercules identifies himself with Lamia (Hera) and
murders his own children. The delphic oracle communicates to him the
fact that he is named Hercules because he owes his immortal fame to
Hera, who through her persecution compelled him to great deeds. It can
be seen that “the great deed” really means the conquering of the mother
and through her to win immortality. His characteristic weapon, the club,
he cuts from the maternal olive tree. Like the sun, he possessed the
arrows of Apollo. He conquered the Nemean lion in his cave, which has
the signification of “the grave in the mother’s womb” (see the end of
this chapter). Then follows the combat with the Hydra, the typical
battle with the dragon; the complete conquering of the mother. (See
below.) Following this, the capture of the Cerynean doe, whom he wounded
with an arrow in the foot. This is what generally happens to the hero,
but here it is reversed. Hercules showed the captured Erymanthian boar
to Eurystheus, whereupon the latter in fear crept into a cask. That is,
he died. The Stymphalides, the Cretan bull, and the man-devouring horse
of Diomedes are symbols of the devastating powers of death, among which
the latter’s relation to the mother may be recognized especially. The
battle for the precious girdle of the Amazon queen Hippolyte permits us
to see once more very clearly the shadow of the mother. Hippolyte is
ready to give up the girdle, but Hera, changing herself into the form of
Hippolyte, calls the Amazons against Hercules in battle. (Compare Horus,
fighting for the head ornament of Isis, about which there is more later.
Chap. 7.) The liberation of Hesione results from Hercules journeying
downwards with his ship into the belly of the monster, and killing the
monster from within after three days labor. (Jonah motive; Christ in the
tomb or in hell; the victory over death by creeping into the womb of the
mother, and its destruction in the form of the mother. The libido in the
form of the beautiful maiden again conquered.) The expedition to Erythia
is a parallel to Gilgamesh, also to Moses, in the Koran, whose goal was
the confluence of the two seas: it is the journey of the sun to the
Western sea, where Hercules discovered the straits of Gibraltar (“to
that passage”: Faust), and with the ship of Helios set out towards
Erythia. There he overcame the gigantic guardian Eurytion (Chumbaba in
the Gilgamesh epic, the symbol of the father), then the triune Geryon (a
monster of phallic libido symbolism), and at the same time wounded Hera,
hastening to the help of Geryon by an arrow shot. Then the robbery of
the herd followed. “The treasure attained with difficulty” is here
presented in surroundings which make it truly unmistakable. Hercules,
like the sun, goes to death, down into the mother (Western sea), but
conquers the libido attached to the mother and returns with the
wonderful kine; he has won back his libido, his life, the mighty
possession. We discover the same thought in the robbery of the golden
apples of Hesperides, which are defended by the hundred-headed dragon.
The victory over Cerberus is also easily understood as the victory over
death by entrance into the mother (underworld). In order to come to his
wife Deianira, he has to undergo a terrible battle with a water god,
Achelous (with the mother). The ferryman Nessus (a centaur) violates
Deianira. With his sun arrows Hercules killed this adversary, but Nessus
advised Deianira to preserve his poisoned blood as a love charm. When
after the insane murder of Iphitus Delphi denied him the speech of the
oracle, he took possession of the sacred tripod. The delphic oracle then
compelled him to become a slave of Omphale, who made him like a child.
After this Hercules returned home to Deianira, who presented him with
the garment poisoned with Nessus’ blood (the Isis snake), which
immediately clung so closely to his skin that he in vain attempted to
tear it off. (The casting of the skin of the aging sun-god; Serpent, as
symbol of rejuvenation.) Hercules then ascended the funeral pyre in
order to destroy himself by fire like the phœnix, that is to say, to
give birth to himself again from his own egg. No one but young
Philoctetes dared to sacrifice the god. Therefore Philoctetes received
the arrows of the sun and the libido myth was renewed with this Horus.

Footnote 615:

Apes, also, have an instinctive fear of snakes.

Footnote 616:

How much alive are still such primitive associations is shown by
Segantini’s picture of the two mothers: cow and calf, mother and child
in the same stable. From this symbolism the surroundings of the
birthplace of the Savior are explained.

Footnote 617:

The myth of Hippolytos shows very beautifully all the typical parts of
the problem: His stepmother Phaedra wantonly falls in love with him. He
repulses her, she complains to her husband of violation; the latter
implores the water god Poseidon to punish Hippolytos. Then a monster
comes out of the sea. Hippolytos’ horses shy and drag Hippolytos to
death. But he is resuscitated by Aesculapius and is placed by the gods
with the wise nymph, Egeria, the counsellor of Numa Pompilius. Thus the
wish is fulfilled; from incest, wisdom has come.

Footnote 618:

Compare Hercules and Omphale.

Footnote 619:

Compare the reproach of Gilgamesh against Ishtar.

Footnote 620:

Spielrein’s patient is also sick from “a snake bite.” _Jahrbuch_, III,
p. 385.

Footnote 621:

The entirely introverted patient of Spielrein uses similar images: she
speaks of “a rigidity of the soul on the cross,” of “stone figures”
which must be “ransomed.”

I call attention here to the fact that the symbolisms mentioned above
are striking examples of Silberer’s “functional category.” They depict
the condition of introversion.

Footnote 622:

W. Gurlitt says: “The carrying of the bull is one of the difficult ἆθλα”
(services) which Mithra performed in the service of freeing humanity;
“somewhat corresponding, if it is permitted to compare the small with
the great, with the carrying of the cross by Christ” (Cumont: “Textes et
Monuments,” I, 72). Surely it is permissible to compare the two acts.

Man should be past that period when, in true barbaric manner, he
haughtily scorned the strange gods, the “dii minorum gentium.” But man
has not progressed that far, even yet.

Footnote 623:

Robertson (“Evangelical Myths,” p. 130) gives an interesting
contribution to the question of the symbol of the carrying of the cross.
Samson carried the “pillars of the gates from Gaza and died between the
columns of the temple of the Philistines.” Hercules, weighted down by
his burden, carried his columns to the place (Gades), where he also died
according to the Syrian version of the legend. The columns of Hercules
mark the western point where the sun sinks into the sea. In old art he
was actually represented carrying the two columns under his arms in such
a way that they exactly formed a cross. Here we perhaps have the origin
of the myth of Jesus, who carries his own cross to the place of
execution. It is worth noting that the three synoptics substitute a man
of the name of Simon from Cyrene as bearer of the cross. Cyrene is in
Libya, the legendary scene upon which Hercules performed the labor of
carrying the columns, as we have seen, and Simon (Simson) is the nearest
Greek name-form for Samson, which in Greek might have been read Simson,
as in Hebrew. But in Palestine it was Simon, Semo or Sem, actually a
name of a god, who represented the old sun-god Semesch, who was
identified with Baal, from whose myth the Samson myth has doubtless
arisen. The god Simon enjoyed especial honor in Samaria. “The cross of
Hercules might well be the sun’s wheel, for which the Greeks had the
symbol of the cross. The sun’s wheel upon the bas-relief in the small
metropolis at Athens contains a cross, which is very similar to the
Maltese cross.” (See Thiele: “Antike Himmelsbilder,” 1898, p. 59.)

Footnote 624:

The Greek myth of Ixion, who was bound to the “four-spoked wheel,” says
this almost without disguise. Ixion first murdered his stepfather, but
later was absolved from guilt by Zeus and blessed with his favor. But
the ingrate attempted to seduce Hera, the mother. Zeus deceived him,
however, allowing the goddess of the clouds, Nephele, to assume Hera’s
form. (From this connection the centaurs have arisen.) Ixion boasted of
his deed, but Zeus as a punishment plunged him into the underworld,
where he was bound to a wheel continually whirled around by the wind.
(Compare the punishment of Francesca da Rimini in Dante and the
“penitents” by Segantini.)

Footnote 625:

Cited from _Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, Jahrgang II, p. 365.

Footnote 626:

The symbolism of death appearing in abundance in dreams has been
emphasized by Stekel (“Sprache des Traumes,” p. 317).

Footnote 627:

Compare the Cassius scene above.


                              CHAPTER VII

Footnote 628:

A direct unconstrained expression of sexuality is a natural occurrence
and as such neither unbeautiful nor repulsive. The “moral” repression
makes sexuality on one side dirty and hypocritical, on the other
shameless and obtrusive.

Footnote 629:

Compare what is said below concerning the motive of fettering.

Footnote 630:

The sacrilegious assault of Horus upon Isis, at which Plutarch (“De Isis
et Osiris”) stands aghast; he expresses himself as follows concerning
it. “But if any one wishes to assume and maintain that all this has
really happened and taken place with respect to blessed and imperishable
nature, which for the most part is considered as corresponding to the
divine; then, to speak in the words of Aeschylus, ‘he must spit out and
clean his mouth.’” From this sentence one can form a conception of how
the well-intentioned people of ancient society may have condemned the
Christian point of view, first the hanged God, then the management of
the family, the “foundation” of the state. The psychologist is not
surprised.

Footnote 631:

Compare the typical fate of Theseus and Peirithoos.

Footnote 632:

Compare the example given for that in Aigremont: “Fuss- und
Schuhsymbolik.” Also Part I of this book; the foot of the sun in an
Armenian folk prayer. Also de Gubernatis: “Die Tiere in der
Indo-Germanischen Mythologie,” Vol. I, p. 220 ff.

Footnote 633:

Rohde: “Psyche.”

Footnote 634:

Porphyrius (“De antro nympharum.” Quoted by Dieterich: “Mithraslit.,” p.
63) says that according to the Mithraic doctrine the souls which pass
away at birth are destined for winds, because these souls had taken the
breath of the wind into custody and therefore had a similar nature:
“ψυχαῖς δ’ εἰς γένεσιν ἰούσαις καὶ ἀπὸ γενέσεως χωριζομέναις εἰκότως
ἔταξαν ἀνέμους διὰ τὸ ἐφελκεσθαι καὶ αὐτὰς πνεῦμα καὶ οὐσίαν ἔχειν
τοιαύτην—(The souls departing at birth and becoming separated, probably
become winds because of inhaling their breath and becoming the same
substance).

Footnote 635:

In the Mithraic liturgy the generating breath of the spirit comes from
the sun, probably “from the tube of the sun” (see Part I). Corresponding
to this idea, in the Rigveda the sun is called the One-footed. Compare
with that the Armenian prayer, for the sun to allow its foot to rest
upon the face of the suppliant (Abeghian: “Der armenische Volksglaube,”
1899, p. 41).

Footnote 636:

Firmicus Maternus (Mathes., I, 5, 9): “Cui (animo) descensus per orbem
solis tribuitur, per orbem vero lunae praeparatur ascensus” (For which
soul a descent through the disc of the sun is devised, but the ascent is
prepared through the disc of the moon). Lydus (“De mens.,” IV, 3) tells
us that the hierophant Praetextatus has said that Janus despatches the
diviner souls to the lunar fields: τὰς θειοτέρας ψυχὰς ἐπὶ τὴν σεληνικὸν
χόρον ἀποπέμπει. Epiphanius (Haeres LXVI, 52): ὅτι ἐκ τῶν ψυχῶν ὁ δίσκος
[τῆς σελήνης] ἀποπίμπλαται. Quoted by Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” I,
I, p. 40. In exotic myths it is the same with the moon. Frobenius:
Ibid., p. 352 ff.

Footnote 637:

“The Light of Asia, or The Great Renunciation” (Mahâbhinish-kramana).

Footnote 638:

One sees upon corresponding representations how the elephant presses
into Maya’s head with its trunk.

Footnote 639:

Rank: “The Myth of the Birth of the Hero,” translated by W. White.

Footnote 640:

The speedy dying of the mother or the separation from the mother belongs
to the myth of the hero. In the myth of the swan maiden which Rank has
analyzed very beautifully, there is the wish-fulfilling thought, that
the swan maiden can fly away again after the birth of the child, because
she has then fulfilled her purpose. Man needs the mother only for
rebirth.

Footnote 641:

Indian word for the rustle of the wind in the trees.

Footnote 642:

Means sound of the waves.

Footnote 643:

An introjection of the object into the subject in the sense of Ferenczi,
the “gegenwurf” or “widerwurf” (Objektum) of the mystics Eckart and
Böhme.

Footnote 644:

Karl Joël (“Seele und Welt,” Jena 1912) says (p. 153): “Life does not
diminish in artists and prophets, but is enhanced. They are the leaders
into the lost Paradise, which now for the first time becomes Paradise
through rediscovery. It is no more the old dull unity of life towards
which the artist strives and leads, it is the sentient reunion, not the
empty but the full unity, not the unity of indifference but the unity of
difference.” “All life is the raising of the equilibrium and the pulling
backwards into equilibrium. Such a return do we find in religion and
art.”

Footnote 645:

By the primal experience must be understood that first human
differentiation between subject and object, that first conscious placing
of object, which is not psychologically conceivable without the
presupposition of an inner division of the animal “man” from himself, by
which precisely is he separated from nature which is at one with itself.

Footnote 646:

Crêvecoeur: “Voyage dans la Haute Pensylvanie,” I, 362.

Footnote 647:

The dragons of the Greek (and Swiss) legends live in or near springs or
other waters of which they are often the guardians.

Footnote 648:

Compare the discussion above about the encircling and devouring motive.
Water as a hindrance in dreams seems to refer to the mother, longing for
the mother instead of positive work. The crossing of water—overcoming of
the resistance; that is to say the mother, as a symbol of the longing
for inactivity like death or sleep.

Footnote 649:

Compare also the Attic custom of stuffing a bull in spring, the customs
of the Lupercalia, Saturnalia, etc. I have devoted to this motive a
separate investigation, therefore I forego further proof.

Footnote 650:

In the Gilgamesh epic, it is directly said that it is immortality which
the hero goes to obtain.

Footnote 651:

Sepp: “Das Heidentum und dessen Bedeutung für das Christentum,” Vol.
III, 82.

Footnote 652:

Compare the symbolism of the arrow above.

Footnote 653:

This thought is generally organized in the doctrine of pre-existence.
Thus in any case man is his own generator, immortal and a hero, whereby
the highest wishes are fulfilled.

Footnote 654:

Frazer: “Golden Bough,” IV, 297.

Footnote 655:

“Thou seekest the heaviest burden, there findest thou thyself”
(Nietzsche: “Zarathustra”).

Footnote 656:

It is an unvarying peculiarity, so to speak, that in the whale-dragon
myth, the hero is very hungry in the belly of the monster and begins to
cut off pieces from the animal, so as to feed himself. He is in the
nourishing mother “in the presexual stage.” His next act, in order to
free himself, is to make a fire. In a myth of the Eskimos of the Behring
Straits, the hero finds a woman in the whale’s belly, the soul of the
animal, which is feminine (Ibid, p. 85). (Compare Frobenius: Ibid,
passim.)

Footnote 657:

The carrying of the tree played an important part, as is evident from a
note in Strabo X, in the cult of Dionysus and Ceres (Demeter).

Footnote 658:

A text on the Pyramids, which treats of the arrival of the dead Pharaoh
in Heaven, depicts how Pharaoh takes possession of the gods in order to
assimilate their divine nature, and to become the lord of the gods: “His
servants have imprisoned the gods with a chain, they have taken them and
dragged them away, they have bound them, they have cut their throats,
and taken out their entrails, they have dismembered them and cooked them
in hot vessels. And the king consumed their force and ate their souls.
The great gods form his breakfast, the medium gods his dinner, the
little gods his supper—the king consumes everything that comes in his
way. Greedily he devours everything and his magic power becomes greater
than all magic power. He becomes the heir of the power, he becomes
greater than all heirs, he becomes the lord of heaven, he eats all
crowns and all bracelets, he eats the wisdom of every god, etc.”
(Wiedemann: “Der alte Orient,” II, 2, 1900, p. 18). This impossible
food, this “Bulimie,” strikingly depicts the sexual libido in regression
to the presexual material, where the mother (the gods) is not the object
of sex but of hunger.

Footnote 659:

The sacramental sacrifice of Dionysus-Zagreus and the eating of the
sacrificial meat produced the “νέος Διόνυσος” the resurrection of the
god, as plainly appears from the Cretan fragments of the Euripides
quoted by Dieterich (Ibid., p. 105):

                     ἁγνὸν δὲ βιον τείνων, ἐξ οὐ
                     Διὸς Ιδαίου μύστης γενόμην
                     καὶ νυκτιπόλου Ζαγρέως βούτας
                     τοὺς ὠμοφάγους δαῖτας τελέσας.

  (Living a blameless life whereby I became an initiate of the Idaean
  Zeus, I celebrated the carnivorous banquet of Zagreus, the wandering
  herdsman of the night.)

The mystics took the god into themselves by eating the uncooked meat of
the sacrificial animal.

Footnote 660:

Richter: 14, 14.

Footnote 661:

Thou boy eternal, thou most beautiful one seen in the heavens, without
horns standing, with thy virgin head, etc.

Footnote 662:

Orphic Hymn, 46. Compare Roscher: “Lexicon,” sect. on Iakchos.

Footnote 663:

A winnowing fan used as cradle.

Footnote 664:

A close parallel to this is the Japanese myth of Izanagi, who, following
his dead spouse into the underworld, implored her to return. She is
ready, but beseeches him, “Do not look at me.” Izanagi produces light
with his reed, that is to say, with a masculine piece of wood (the
fire-boring Phallus), and thus loses his spouse. (Frobenius: Ibid., p.
343.) Mother must be put in the place of spouse. Instead of the mother,
the hero produces fire; Hiawatha, maize; Odin, Runes, when he in torment
hung on the tree.

Footnote 665:

Quoted from De Jong: “Das antike Mysterienwesen.” Leiden 1910, p. 22.

Footnote 666:

A son-lover from the Demeter myth is Iasion, who embraces Demeter upon a
thrice-ploughed cornfield. (Bridal couch in the pasture.) For that
Iasion was struck by lightning by Zeus (Ovid: “Metam.,” IX).

Footnote 667:

In a sunless place.

Footnote 668:

Descend into a sunless desert place.

Footnote 669:

Descent into a cave.

Footnote 670:

See Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” I, p. 56.

Footnote 671:

“Mithraslit.,” p. 123.

Footnote 672:

For example upon a Campana relief in Lovatelli (“Antichi monumenti,”
Roma, 1889, I, IV, Fig. 5). Likewise the Veronese Priapus has a basket
filled with phalli.

Footnote 673:

Compare Grimm: II, IV, p. 899: Either by the caressing or kissing of a
dragon or a snake, the fearful animal was changed into a beautiful woman
whom the hero wins in this way.

Footnote 674:

The mother, the earth, is the distributor of nourishment. The mother in
presexual material has this meaning. Therefore St. Dominicus was
nourished from the breasts of the mother of God. The sun wife, Namaqua,
consists of bacon. Compare with this the megalomanic ideas of my
patient, who asserted: “I am Germania and Helvetia made exclusively from
‘sweet butter’” (“Psychology of Dementia Praecox”).

Footnote 675:

He who achieved divinity through the womb.

Footnote 676:

He who achieved divinity through the womb; he is a serpent, and he was
drawn through the womb of those who were being initiated.

Footnote 677:

The golden serpent is crowded into the breast of the initiates and is
then drawn out through the lowest parts.

Footnote 678:

O Fœtus, he who is in the vagina or womb.

Footnote 679:

Compare the ideas of Nietzsche: “Piercing into one’s own pit,” etc. In a
prayer to Hermes in a London papyrus it is said: ἐλθέ μοι, κύρίε Ἑρμῆ,
ὡς τὰ βρέφη εἰς τὰς κοιλίας τῶν γυναικῶν (Come to me, Lord Hermes, as
the foetus into the womb of the mother). Kenyon: “Greek Papyrus in the
British Museum,” 1893, p. 116; Pap. CXXII, Z. 2 ff. Cited by Dieterich:
Ibid., p. 97.

Footnote 680:

Compare De Jong: Ibid., p. 22.

Footnote 681:

The typical grain god of antiquity was Adonis, whose death and
resurrection was celebrated annually. He was the son-lover of the
mother, for the grain is the son and fructifier of the womb of the earth
as Robertson very correctly remarks (“Evangelical Myths,” p. 36).

Footnote 682:

De Jong: Ibid., p. 14.

Footnote 683:

On a certain night an image is placed lying down in a litter; there is
weeping and lamentations among the people, with beatings of bodies and
tears. After a time, when they have become exhausted from the
lamentations, a light appears; then the priest anoints the throats of
all those who were weeping, and softly whispers, “Take courage, O
initiates of the Redeemed Divinity; you shall achieve salvation through
your grief.”

Footnote 684:

Faust:

      “There whirls the press, like clouds on clouds unfolding,
      Then with stretched arm swing high the key thou’rt holding!”

Footnote 685:

As an example among many, I mention here the Polynesian Rata myth cited
by Frobenius: Ibid., pp. 64–66: “With a favorable wind the boat was
sailing easily away over the Ocean, when Nganaoa called out one day: ‘O
Rata, here is a fearful enemy who rises up from the Ocean!’ It was an
open mussel of huge dimensions. One shell was in front of the boat, the
other behind it, and the vessel was directly between. The next moment
the horrible mussel would have clapped its shells together and ground
the boat and occupants to pieces in its grip. But Nganaoa was prepared
for this possibility. He grasped his long spear and quickly plunged it
into the belly of the animal so that the creature, instead of snapping
together, at once sank back to the bottom of the sea. After they had
escaped from this danger they continued on their way. But after a while
the voice of the always watchful Nganaoa was again to be heard. ‘O Rata,
once more a terrible enemy rushes upwards from the depths of the ocean.’
This time it was a mighty octopus, whose gigantic tentacles already
surrounded the boat, in order to destroy it. At this critical moment,
Nganaoa seized his spear, and plunged it into the head of the octopus.
The tentacles sank away limp and the dead monster rose to the surface of
the water. Once more they continued on their journey, but a yet greater
danger awaited them. One day the valiant Nganaoa called out, ‘O Rata,
here is a great whale!’ The huge jaws were wide open, the lower jaw was
already under the boat, and the upper one over it. One moment more and
the whale would have devoured them. Now Nganaoa ‘the dragon slayer’
broke his spear into two parts, and at the moment when the whale was
about to devour them, he stuck the two pieces into the jaws of the foe
so that he could not close his jaws. Nganaoa quickly sprang into the
jaws of the great whale (devouring of the hero) and looked into its
belly, and what did he see? There sat both his parents, his father,
Tairitokerau, and his mother, Vaiaroa, who had been gulped down into the
depths of this monster. The oracle has come true. The voyage has come to
its end. Great was the joy of the parents of Nganaoa when they saw their
son. They were convinced that their freedom was at hand. And Nganaoa
resolved upon revenge. He took one of the two pieces from the jaws of
the animal—one was enough to make it impossible for the whale to close
his jaws and so keep a passage free for Nganaoa and his parents. He
broke this part of the spear in two, in order to use them as wood to
produce fire by rubbing. He commanded his father to hold one firmly
below, while he himself managed the upper one, until the fire began to
glimmer (production of fire). Now when he blew this into flames, he
hastened to heat the fatty part (heart) of the belly with the fire. The
monster, writhing with pain, sought help swimming to the nearest land
(journey in the sea). As soon as he reached the sandbank (land) father,
mother and son walked onto the land through the open jaws of the dying
whale (slipping out of the hero).”

Footnote 686:

In the New Zealand Maui myth (quoted by Frobenius: Ibid., p. 66 ff.) the
monster to be conquered is the grandmother Hine-nui-te-po. Maui, the
hero, says to the birds who assist him: “My little friends, now when I
creep into the jaws of the old woman, you must not laugh, but when I
have been in and come out again, from her mouth, then you may greet me
with jubilant laughter.” Then Maui actually creeps into the mouth of the
sleeping old woman.

Footnote 687:

Published and prepared by Julius v. Negelein, in “Relig. Geschichte.”
Vers. u. Vorarb. von Dieterich und Wünsch, Vol. XI. Giessen 1912.

Footnote 688:

Quoted, J. v. Negelein: “Der Traumschlüssel des Jagaddeva,” p. 256.

Footnote 689:

The pine-tree speaks the significant word, “Minne-wawa!”

Footnote 690:

In a fairy tale, the bird comes to the tree which grows upon the grave
of the mother in order to give help.

Footnote 691:

Roscher: s. “Picus,” Sp. 2494, 62. Probably a symbol of rebirth.

Footnote 692:

The father of Picus is called Sterculus or Sterculius, a name which is
clearly derived from stercus = excrementum; he is also said to be the
devisor of manure. The primitive creator who also created the mother did
so in the manner of infantile creation, which we have previously
learned. The supreme god laid an egg, his mother, from which he was
again produced—this is an analogous train of thought.

Footnote 693:

Introversion = to enter the mother; to sink into one’s own inner-world,
or source of the libido, is symbolized by creeping in, passing through,
boring. (Scratching behind the ear = making fire.) Boring into the ear,
scratching with the nails, swallowing serpents. Thus the Buddhist legend
is understandable. When Gautama had spent the whole day sitting in deep
reflection under the sacred tree, at evening he became Buddha, the
illumined one.

Footnote 694:

Compare φαλλός (phallus) above and its etymological connection.

Footnote 695:

Spielrein’s patient received from God three wounds through her head,
breast and eye. “Then there came a resurrection of the Spirit”
(_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 376).

In the Tibetan myth of Bogda Gesser Khan the sun-hero shoots his arrow
into the forehead of the demoniacal old woman, who devours it and spits
it up again. In a Calmuc myth, the hero shoots the arrow into the eye
emitting rays, which is found on the forehead of the bull. Compare with
that the victory of Polyphemus, whose character is signified upon an
Attic vase because with it there is also a snake (as symbol of the
mother. See the explanation of the sacrificium Mithriacum).

Footnote 696:

In the form of the father, for Megissogwon is the demon of the west,
like Mudjekeewis.

Footnote 697:

Compare Deussen: “Geschichte der Philosophie,” Vol. I, p. 14.

Footnote 698:

An analogy is Zeus and Athene. In Rigveda 10, 31, the word of prayer
becomes a pregnant cow. In Persian it is the “Eye of Ahura”; Babylonian
_Nabu_: the word of fate; Persian _vohu mano_: the good thought of the
creator God; in Stoic conceptions, Hermes is _logos_ or world intellect;
in Alexandria the Σοφία, in the Old Testament it is the angel of
Jehovah, or the countenance of God. Jacob wrestled with the angel during
the night at the ford of Jabbok, after he had crossed the water with all
that he possessed. (Night journey on the sea, battle with the night
snake, combat at the ford like Hiawatha.) In this combat, Jacob
dislocated his thigh. (Motive of the twisting out of the arm. Castration
on account of the overpowering of the mother.) This “face” of God was
compared in the old Jewish philosophy to the mystic Metatron, the prince
of the face of God (Josiah 5, 14), who brings “the prayer to God” and
“in whom is the name of God.” The Naassens (Ophits) called the Holy
Ghost the “first word,” the mother of all that lives; the Valentinians
comprehended the descending dove of Pneuma as “the word of the mother
from above, the Sophia.” (Drews: “Christ Myth,” I, pp. 16, 22, 80.) In
Assyria, Gibil, the fire god, had the rôle of Logos. (Tiele: “Assyr.
Gesch.”) In Ephrem, the Syrian writer of hymns, John the Baptist says to
Christ: “A spark of fire in the air waits for thee over the Jordan. If
thou followest it and willst be baptised, then take possession of
thyself, wash thyself, for who has the power to take hold of burning
fire with his hands? Thou, who art wholly fire, have mercy upon me.”
Usener: “Religionsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen.” Cited by Drews: Ibid.,
p. 81.

Footnote 699:

Perhaps the great significance of the name arose from this phantasy.

Footnote 700:

Grimm mentions the legend that Siegfried was suckled by a doe. (Compare
Hiawatha’s first deed.)

Footnote 701:

Compare Grimm’s “Mythology.” Mime or Mîmir is a gigantic being of great
wisdom, “a very old Nature God,” with whom the Norse gods associate.
Later fables make of him a demon and a skilful smith (closest relation
to Wieland). Just as Wotan obtained advice from the wise woman (compare
the quotation from Julius Cæsar about the German matron), so does Odin
go to the brook of Mîmir in which wisdom and judgment lie hidden, to the
spiritual mother (mother-imago). There he requests a drink (drink of
immortality), but no sooner does he receive it than he sacrifices his
eye to the well (death of the sun in the sea). The well of Mîmir points
undoubtedly to the mother significance of Mîmir. Thus Mîmir gets
possession of Odin’s other eye. In Mîmir, the mother (wise giant) and
the embryo (dwarf, subterranean sun, Harpocrates) is condensed;
likewise, as mother, he is the source of wisdom and art. (“Mother-imago”
therefore may be translated as “phantasy” under certain circumstances.)

Footnote 702:

The magic sleep is also present in the Homeric celebration of the
Hierosgamos. (See above.)

Footnote 703:

This is proved by Siegfried’s words:

                         “Through furious fire
                         To thee have I fared;
                         Nor birny nor buckler
                         Guarded my breast:
                         The flames have broken
                         Through to my heart,
                         My blood doth bound
                         In turbulent streams;
                         A raving fire
                         Within me is kindled.”

Footnote 704:

The cave dragon is the “terrible mother.” In the German legends the
maiden to be rescued often appears as a snake or dragon, and must be
kissed in this form, through which the dragon is changed into a
beautiful woman. A fish’s or a serpent’s tail is attributed to certain
wise women. In the “golden mountain” a king’s daughter was bewitched
into a snake. In the Oselberg near Dinkelsbühl there lives a snake with
a woman’s head and a bunch of keys around her neck. (Grimm.)

Footnote 705:

Faust (II Part):

             Doch im Erstarren such ich nicht mein Heil,
             Das Schaudern ist der Menschheit bestes Teil;
             Wie auch die Welt ihm das Gefühl verteure,
             Ergriffen, fühlt er tief das Ungeheure.

Footnote 706:

“Etymol. Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache,” sub. Hort.

Footnote 707:

“Griechische Etymologie,” sub. κεύθω.

Footnote 708:

Pausanias: I, 18, 7.

Footnote 709:

Ocean, who arose to be the producer of all.

Footnote 710:

Rohde: “Psyche,” IV. Aufl., Vol. I, p. 214.

Footnote 711:

J. Maehly: “Die Schlange im Mythus und Kultus der klassischen Völker,”
1867.

Footnote 712:

Duchesne: “Lib. pontifical.,” I, S. CIX. Cited by Cumont: “Textes et
Monuments,” Vol. I, p. 351.

Footnote 713:

There was a huge dragon on Mount Tarpeius, where the Capitolium stands.
Once a month, with sacrilegious maidens, the priests descended 365 steps
into the hell of this dragon, carrying expiatory offerings of food for
the dragon. Then the dragon suddenly and unexpectedly arose, and, though
he did not come out, he poisoned the air with his breath. Thence came
the mortality of man and the deepest sorrow for the death of the
children. When, for the defence of truth, St. Silvester had had a
conflict with the heathen, it came to this that the heathen said:
“Silvester, go down to the dragon, and in the name of thy God make him
desist from the killing of mankind.”

Footnote 714:

Cited by Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” Vol. I, p. 351.

Footnote 715:

Like his counterpart, the apocalyptic “son of man,” from whose mouth
proceeds a “sharp two-edged sword.” Rev. i:16. Compare Christ as serpent
and the Antichrist seducing the people. Rev. xx:3. We come across the
same motive of the guardian dragon who pierces women, in the myth from
Van Diemen’s Land: “A horn-back lay in the cavity of a rock, a huge
horn-back! The horn-back was large and he had a very long spear. From
his cavity he espied the women; he saw them dive into the water, he
pierced them with his spear, he killed them, he carried them away. For
some time they were to be seen no longer.” The monster was then killed
by the two heroes. They made fire(!) and brought the women to life
again. (Cited by Frobenius: Ibid., p. 77.)

Footnote 716:

The eyes of the Son of man are like a flame of fire. Rev. i:15.

Footnote 717:

Near the city of Rome there was a certain cavern in which appeared a
dragon of remarkable size, mechanically produced, brandishing a sword in
his mouth, his eyes glittering like gems, fearful and terrible. Hither
came virgins every year, devoted to this service, adorned with flowers,
who were given to him in sacrifice. Bringing these gifts, they
unknowingly descended the steps to a point where, with diabolical
cunning, the dragon was suspended, striking those who came a blow with
the sword, so that the innocent blood was shed. Now, there was a certain
monk who, on account of his good deeds, was well known to Stilico, the
patrician; he killed this dragon as follows: He examined each separate
step carefully, both with a rod and his own hand, until, discovering the
false step, he exposed the diabolical fraud. Then, jumping over this
step, he went down and killed the dragon, cutting him to pieces,
demonstrating that one who could be destroyed by human hand could not be
a divinity.

Footnote 718:

Cited by Cumont: “Textes et Monuments,” I, p. 352.

Footnote 719:

Compare Roscher: “Lexicon,” I, 2, 1885.

Footnote 720:

Out of dark places she rushes on children and women.

Footnote 721:

The triple form also related to the moon (waxing, full, and waning
moon). However, such cosmic relations are primarily projections of
metapsychology.

Footnote 722:

Faust (II Part): The Scene of the mothers: The key belongs to Hecate,
προθυραία, as the guardian of Hades, and psychopompic Divinity. Compare
Janus, Peter and Aion.

Footnote 723:

Attribute of the “terrible mother”: Ishtar has “tormented the horse with
goad and whip and tortured him to death.” (Jensen: “Gilgamesh Epic,” p.
18.) Also an attribute of Helios.

Footnote 724:

Phallic symbol of fear.

Footnote 725:

Murderous weapon as symbol of the fructifying phallus.

Footnote 726:

Plato has already testified to this as a phallic symbol, as is mentioned
above.

Footnote 727:

White-leaved.

Footnote 728:

Far-shooting Hecate.

Footnote 729:

Far-shooting, the far-darting.

Footnote 730:

Goddess of birth.

Footnote 731:

Cited by Roscher: I, 2, Sp. 1909.

Footnote 732:

Hecate.

Footnote 733:

Compare the symbolism in the hymn to Mary of Melk (12th century).

                        “Santa Maria,
                        Closed gate
                        Opened to God’s command—
                        Sealed fountain,
                        Barred garden,
                        Gate of Paradise.”

The same symbolism occurs in an erotic verse:

                “Maiden, may I enter with you
                Into your rose garden,
                There, where the little red roses grow,
                Those delicate and tender roses,
                With a tree close by,
                Whose leaves sway to and fro,
                And a cool little brook
                Which lies directly beneath it.”

Footnote 734:

Sacrificial cakes offered to the gods.

Footnote 735:

Herzog: “Aus dem Asklepieion von Kos.” _Archiv für
Religionswissenschaft_, Vol. X, H. 2, p. 219 ff.

Footnote 736:

A Mithraic sanctuary was, when at all possible, a subterranean grotto;
often the cavern was merely an artificial one. It is conceivable that
the Christian crypts and subterranean churches are of similar meaning.

Footnote 737:

Compare Schultze: “Die Katakomben,” 1882, p. 9.

Footnote 738:

In the Taurobolia a bull was sacrificed over a grave, in which lay the
one to be consecrated. His initiation consisted in being covered with
the blood of the sacrifice. Also a regeneration and rebirth, baptism.
The baptized one was called _Renatus_.

Footnote 739:

Additional proof in Herzog: Ibid., p. 224.

Footnote 740:

Ibid., p. 225.

Footnote 741:

Ritual sacrificial food offered to the gods.

Footnote 742:

Indeed sacred serpents were kept for display and other purposes.

Footnote 743:

Ritual sacrificial food offered to the gods.

Footnote 744:

Rohde: “Psyche,” chap. 1, p. 244.

Footnote 745:

Vol. I, p. 28.

Footnote 746:

Fick. Compare “Wörterbuch,” I, p. 424.

Footnote 747:

Compare the stable cleaning of Hercules. The stable, like the cavern, is
a place of birth. We find stable and cavern in Mithracism combined with
the bull symbolism, as in Christianity. (See Robertson: “Christ and
Krishna.”) In a Basuto myth, the stable birth also occurs. (Frobenius.)
The stable birth belongs to the mythologic animal fable; therefore the
legend of the conceptio immaculata, allied to the history of the
impregnation of the barren Sarah, appears very early in Egypt as an
animal fable. Herodotus, III, 28, relates: “This Apis or Epaphos is a
calf whose mother was unable to become impregnated, but the Egyptians
said that a ray from heaven fell upon the cow, and from that she brought
forth Apis.” Apis symbolizes the sun, therefore his signs: upon the
forehead a white spot, upon his back a figure of an eagle, upon his
tongue a beetle.

Footnote 748:

According to Philo, the serpent is the most spirited of all animals; its
nature is that of fire, the rapidity of its movements is great and this
without need of any especial limbs. It has a long life and sheds age,
with its skin. Therefore it was inculcated in the mysteries, because it
is immortal. (Maehly: “Die Schlange in Mythologie und Kultus der
klassischen Völker,” 1867, p. 7.)

Footnote 749:

For example, the St. John of Quinten Matsys (see illustration); also two
pictures by an unknown Strassburg master in the Gallery at Strassburg.

Footnote 750:

“And the woman—having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and
filthiness of her fornication” (Rev. xvii:4). The woman is “drunken with
the blood of the saints and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus”: a
striking image of the terrible mother (here, cup = genitals). In the
Tibetan myth of Bogda Gesser Khan there is a beetle (treasure attainable
with difficulty), which the demoniac old woman guards. Gesser says to
her: “Sister, never since I was born have you shown me the beetle my
soul.” The mother libido is also the soul. It is significant that the
old woman desired the hero as a husband. (Frobenius.)

Footnote 751:

This is also the significance of the mysteries. Their purpose is to lead
the useless, regressive incestuous libido over the bridges of symbolism
into rational activity, and through that transform the obscure
compulsion of the libido working up from the unconscious into social
communion and higher moral endeavor.

Footnote 752:

An excellent example of this is the description of the orgies of the
Russian sectarian by Mereschkowski, in his book, “Peter the Great and
Alexei.” In the cult of the Asiatic Goddesses of love (Anaïtis, Mylitta,
etc.), prostitution in the temple was an organized institution. The
orgiastic cult of Anâhita (Anaïtis) has been preserved in modern sects,
with the Ali Illâhîja, the so-called “extinguishers of light”; with the
Yezêds and Dushikkurds, who celebrate nocturnal religious orgies which
end in a wild sexual debauch, during which incestuous unions also occur.
(Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,” II, p. 64.) Further examples are to be
found in the valuable work of Stoll (“Das Sexualleben in der
Völkerpsychologie,” Leipzig 1908).

Footnote 753:

Concerning the kiss of the snake, compare Grimm, II, p. 809. By this
means, a beautiful woman was set free. The sucking refers to the
maternal significance of the snake, which exists along with the phallic.
It is a coitus act on the presexual stage. Spielrein’s insane patient
(_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 344) says as follows: “Wine is the blood of
Jesus.—The water must be blessed, and was blessed by him. The one buried
alive becomes the vineyard. That wine becomes blood—the water is mingled
with ‘childishness’ because God says, ‘become like little children.’
There is also a spermatic water which can be drunken with blood. That
perhaps is the water of Jesus.” Here we find a commingling of all the
various meanings of the way to win immortality. Wiedemann (“Der alte
Orient,” II, 2, p. 18; cited by Dieterich: Ibid., p. 101) asserts that
it is an Egyptian idea that man draws in the milk of immortality by
suckling the breast of a goddess. (Compare with that the myth of
Hercules, where the hero attains immortality by a single draw at the
breast of Hera.)

Footnote 754:

From the writings of the sectarian Anton Unternährer: “Geheimes Reskript
der bernischen Regierung an die Pfarr- und Statthalterämter,” 1821. I
owe the knowledge of this fragment to Rev. Dr. O. Pfister.

Footnote 755:

Nietzsche: “Zarathustra”: “And I also give this parable to you: Not a
few who wished to drive out the devil from themselves, by that lead
themselves into the slough.”

Footnote 756:

Compare the vision of Zosimos.

Footnote 757:

The significance of the communion ritual as a unio mystica with God is
at bottom sexual and very corporeal. The primitive significance of the
communion is that of a Hierosgamos. Therefore in the fragment of the
Attis mysteries handed down by Firmicus it is said that the mystic eats
from the Tympanon, drinks from the Kymbalon, and he confesses: ὑπὸ τὸν
παστὸν ὑπέδυον, which means the same as: “I have entered the bridal
chamber.” Usener (in Dieterich: Ibid., p. 126) refers to a series of
quotations from the patristic literature, of which I mention merely one
sentence from the speeches of Proclus of Constantinople: ἡ παστας εν ἡ ὁ
λογος ενυμφευσατο την σακρα (The bridal chamber in which the Logos has
espoused the flesh). The church is also to some extent the bridal
chamber, where the spirit unites with the flesh, really the Cömeterium.
Irenaeus mentions some more of the initiatory customs of certain gnostic
sects, which were undoubtedly nothing but spiritual weddings. (Compare
Dieterich: Ibid., p. 127 ff.) In the Catholic church, even yet, a
Hierosgamos is celebrated on the installation of a priest. A young
maiden there represents the church as bride.

Footnote 758:

Compare also the phantasies of Felicien Rops: The crucified Priapus.

Footnote 759:

Compare with that the symbolism in Nietzsche’s poem: “Why enticest thou
thyself into the paradise of the old serpent?”

Footnote 760:

“Thus Spake Zarathustra.”

Footnote 761:

Nietzsche himself must have shown at times a certain predilection for
loathsome animals. Compare C. A. Bernoulli: “Franz Oberbeck und
Friedrich Nietzsche,” Vol. I, p. 166.

Footnote 762:

I recall Nietzsche’s dream, which is cited in Part I of this book.

Footnote 763:

The Germanic myth of Dietrich von Bern, who had fiery breath, belongs to
this idea: He was wounded in the forehead by an arrow, a piece of which
remained there fixed; from this, he was called the immortal. In a
similar manner, half of Hrûngnir’s wedge-shaped stone fastened itself in
Thor’s head. See Grimm: “Mythology,” I, p. 309.

Footnote 764:

“Geschichte der Philosophie,” Vol. I, p. 181.

Footnote 765:

Sa tapo atapyata.

Footnote 766:

The Stoic idea of the creative primal warmth, in which we have already
recognized the libido (Part I, Chap. IV), belongs in this connection,
also the birth of Mithra from a stone, which resulted _solo aestu
libidinis_ (through the heat of the libido only).

Footnote 767:

The place of discipline.

Footnote 768:

In the accurate prose translation this passage reads: “There Kâma
developed from him in the beginning” (Deussen: “Gesch. d. Phil.,” Vol.
I, p. 123). Kâma is the libido. “The sages found the root of being in
the non-being, in the heart, searching with introspection.”

Footnote 769:

“Fame and Eternity.”

Footnote 770:

Grimm: “Mythology,” III. The heroes have serpent’s eyes, as do the
kings: ormr î auga. Sigurdr is called Ormr î Auga.

Footnote 771:

Nietzsche’s

                                     “In the green light,
             Happiness still plays around the brown abyss.
             His voice grows hoarse,
             His eye flashes verdigris!”

Footnote 772:

From “The Poverty of the Richest.”

Footnote 773:

Nietzsche’s “Fragments of Dionysus-Dithyrambs.”

              “Heavy eyes,
              Which seldom love:
              But when they love, it flashes out
              Like a gold mine
              Where a dragon guards the treasure of love.”

Footnote 774:

He is pregnant with the sun.

Footnote 775:

Galatians iii:27 alludes to this primitive idea: “For as many of you as
have been baptized into Christ have _put on_ Christ.”

Footnote 776:

Just as is Mânî so is Marsyas a crucified one. (See Robertson:
“Evangelical Myths,” p. 66.) Both were hung, a punishment which has an
unmistakable symbolic value, because the suspension (“to suffer and fear
in the torment of suspension”) is the symbol of an unfulfilled wish.
(See Freud: “The Interpretation of Dreams.”) Therefore Christ, Odin,
Attis hung on trees (= mother). The Talmudic Jesus ben Pandira
(apparently the earliest historic Jesus) suffered a similar death, on
the eve of a Passover festival in the reign of Alexander Jannaeus
(106–79 B.C.). This Jesus may have been the founder of the “Essenes,” a
sect (see Robertson: “Evang. Myths,” p. 123) which stood in a certain
relation to subsequent Christianity. The Jesus ben Stada identified with
the preceding Jesus, but removed into the second Christian century, was
also hung. Both were first stoned, a punishment which was, so to speak,
a bloodless one like hanging. The Christian church, which spills no
blood, therefore burned. This may not be without significance for a
peculiar ceremony reported from Uganda: “When a king of Uganda wished to
live forever, he went to a place in Busiro, where a feast was given by
the chiefs. At the feast the Mamba Clan was especially held in honor,
and during the festivities a member of this clan was secretly chosen by
his fellows, caught by them, and beaten to death with their fists; no
stick or other weapon might be used by the men appointed to do the deed.
After death, the victim’s body was flayed and the skin made into a
special whip, etc. After the ceremony of the feast in Busiro, with its
strange sacrifice, the king of Uganda was supposed to live forever, but
from that day he was never allowed to see his mother again.” (Quoted
from Frazer: “Golden Bough,” Part IV, p. 415.) The sacrifice, which is
chosen to purchase everlasting life for another, is here given over to a
bloodless death and after that skinned. That this sacrifice has an
absolutely unmistakable relation to the mother—as we already know—is
corroborated very plainly by Frazer.

Footnote 777:

Frazer: “Adonis, Attis, Osiris,” p. 242.

Footnote 778:

Frazer: Ibid., p. 246.

Footnote 779:

Frazer: Ibid., p. 249.

Footnote 780:

Cited by Dieterich in “Mithrasliturgie,” p. 215.

Footnote 781:

The bull, father of the serpent, and the serpent, father of the bull.

Footnote 782:

Another attempt at solution seems to be the Dioscuri motive: The sun
consists of two brothers similar to each other, the one mortal, the
other immortal. This motive is found, as is well known, in the two
Açvins, who, however, are not further differentiated. In the Mithraic
doctrine, Mithra is the father, Sol the son, and yet both are one as ὁ
μέγας θεὸς Ἥελιος Μίθρας. The motive of twins emerges, not infrequently,
in dreams. In a dream, where it is related that a woman had given birth
to twins, the dreamer found, instead of the expected children, a box and
a bottle-like object. Here the twins had male and female significance.
This observation hints at a possible significance of the Dioscuri as the
sun and its re-bearing mother—daughter (?).

Footnote 783:

Among the daughters of the desert.

Footnote 784:

_Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, Vol. II, p. 169.

Footnote 785:

This problem has frequently been employed in the ancient sun myths. It
is especially striking that the lion-killing heroes, Samson and
Hercules, are weaponless in the combat. The lion is the symbol of the
most intense summer heat, astrologically he is the Domicilium Solis.
Steinthal (_Zeitschrift für Völkerpsychologie_, Vol. II, p. 133) reasons
about this in a most interesting manner, which I quote word for word:

“When the Sun-god fights against the summer heat, he fights against
himself; when he kills it, he kills himself. Most certainly! The
Phœnician, Assyrian and Lydian ascribes self-destruction to his sun-god,
for he can comprehend the lessening of the sun’s heat only as a
self-murder. He believed that the sun stood at its highest in the summer
and its rays scorched with destroying heat: thus does the god burn
himself, but he does not die, only rejuvenates himself.—Also Hercules
burns himself, but ascends to Olympus in the flames. This is the
contradiction in the pagan gods. They, as forces of nature, are helpful
as well as harmful to men. In order to do good and to redeem they must
work against themselves. The opposition is dulled, when either of the
two sides of the forces of nature is personified in an especial god, or
when the power of nature is conceived of as a divine personage; however,
each of its two modes of action, the benevolent and the injurious, has
an especial symbol. The symbol is always independent, and finally is the
god himself; and while originally the god worked against himself,
destroyed himself, now symbol fights against symbol, god against god, or
the god with the symbol.”

Certainly the god fights with himself, with his other self, which we
have conceived of under the symbol of mother. The conflict always
appears to be the struggle with the father and the conquering of the
mother.

Footnote 786:

The old Etruscan custom of covering the urn of ashes, and the dead
buried in the earth, with the shield, is something more than mere
chance.

Footnote 787:

Incest motive.

Footnote 788:

Compare the idea of the Phœnix in the Apocalypse of Baruch, Part I of
this book.


                              CHAPTER VIII

Footnote 789:

The kingdom of the mother is the kingdom of the (unconscious) phantasy.

Footnote 790:

Behind nature stands the mother, in continuation of our earlier
discussions and in the foregoing poem of Hölderlin. Here the mother
hovers before the poet’s mind as a tree, on which the child hangs like a
blossom.

Footnote 791:

Once he called the “stars his brothers.” Here I must call to mind the
remarks in the first part of this work, especially that mystic
identification with the stars: εγω ειμι συμπλανος ὑμιν αστερ (I am a
star who wanders together with you). The separation and differentiation
from the mother, the “individuation” creates that transition of the
subjective into the objective, that foundation of consciousness. Before
this, man was one with the mother. That is to say, with the world as a
whole. At that period man did not know the sun as brother. This occurred
for the first time, when after the resulting separation and placing of
the object, the libido, regressing to the infantile, perceived in that
first state its possibilities and the suspicion of his relationship to
the stars forced itself upon him. This occurrence appears not
infrequently in the introversion psychoses. A young peasant, an ordinary
laboring man, developed an introversion psychosis (Dementia Praecox).
His first feelings of illness were shown by a special connection which
he felt with the sun and the stars. The stars became full of meaning to
him, and the sun suggested ideas to him. This apparently entirely new
perception of nature is met with very often in this disease. Another
patient began to understand the language of birds, which brought him
messages from his beloved (mother). Compare Siegfried.

Footnote 792:

The spring belongs to the idea as a whole.

Footnote 793:

This idea expresses the divine-infantile blessedness, as in Hyperion’s
“Song of Fate.”

                  “You wander above there in the light
                  Upon soft clouds, blessed genii!
                  Shining breezes of the gods
                  Stir you gently.”

Footnote 794:

This portion is especially noteworthy. In childhood everything was given
him, and man is disinclined to obtain it once more for himself, because
it is won only through “toil and compulsion”: even love costs trouble.
In childhood the well of the libido gushed forth in bubbling fulness. In
later life it involves hard work to even keep the stream flowing for the
onward striving life, because with increasing age the stream has a
growing inclination to flow back to its source, if effectual mechanisms
are not created to hinder this backward movement or at least to organize
it. In this connection belongs the generally accepted idea, that love is
absolutely spontaneous; only the infantile type of love is something
absolutely spontaneous. The love of an adult man allows itself to be
purposefully directed. Man can also say “I will love.” The heights of
culture are conditioned by _the capacity for displacement of the
libido_.

Footnote 795:

Motive of immortality in the fable of the death of Empedocles. Horace:
_Deus immortalis haberi—Dum cupit Empedocles ardentem frigidus
Aetnam—Insiluit_ (Empedocles deliberately threw himself into the glowing
Aetna because he wanted to be believed an immortal god).

Footnote 796:

Compare the beautiful passage in the journey to Hades of Odysseus, where
the hero wishes to embrace his mother.

  “But I, thrilled by inner longing,
  Wanted to embrace the soul of my departed mother.
  Three times I endeavored, full of passionate desire for the embrace:
  Three times from my hands she escaped
  Like nocturnal shades and the images of dreams,
  And in my heart sadness grew more intense.” (“Odyss.,” XI, 204.)

The underworld, hell, is indeed the place of unfulfilled longing. The
Tantalus motive is found through all of hell.

Footnote 797:

Spielrein’s patient (_Jahrbuch_, III, p. 345) speaks in connection with
the significance of the communion of “the water mixed with childishness;
spermatic water, blood and wine.” P. 368 she says: “The souls fallen
into the water are saved by God, they fall into the deep abyss—The souls
were saved by the son of God.”

Footnote 798:

The φάρμακον ἀθανασίας, the drink of Soma, the Haoma of the Persians,
might have been made from Ephedra vulgaris. Spiegel: “Erân.
Altertumskunde,” I, p. 433.

Footnote 799:

Like the heavenly city in Hauptmann’s “Hannele”:

 “Salvation is a wonderful city,
 Where peace and joy never end,
 Its houses are marble, its roofs are gold,
 But wine flows in silver fountains,
 Flowers are strewed upon the white, white streets,
 Continually from the towers sound the wedding bells.
 Green as May are the battlements, shining with the light of early
    morning.
 Giddy with butterflies, crowned with roses.

        ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

 There below, hand in hand,
 The festive people wander through the heavenly land,
 The wide, wide sea is filled with red, red wine,
 They plunge in with shining bodies!
 They plunge into the foam and the splendor,
 The clear purple covers them entirely,
 And they exulting arise from the flood,
 Thus they are washed by Jesus’ blood.”

Footnote 800:

Richter: 15, 17.

Footnote 801:

Prellwitz: “Griech. Etym.,” s. σκήπτω.

Footnote 802:

Of the father.

Footnote 803:

Fate.

Footnote 804:

Chances and fates.

Footnote 805:

This was really the purpose of all mysteries. They create symbolisms of
death and rebirth for the practical application and education of the
infantile libido. As Frazer (“The Golden Bough,” I, p. 442) points out,
exotic and barbaric peoples have in their initiatory mysteries the same
symbolism of death and resurrection, just as Apuleius (“Metam.,” XI, 23)
says of the initiation of Lucius into the Isis mysteries: “Accessi
confinium mortis et calcato Proserpinae limine per omnia vectus elementa
remeavi” (I have reached the confines of death and trodden the threshold
of Proserpina; passing through all the elements, I have returned).
Lucius died figuratively (ad instar voluntariae mortis) and was born
anew (renatus).

Footnote 806:

This does not hinder the modern neurasthenic from making work a means of
repression and worrying about it.

Footnote 807:

Compare Genesis xlix: 17: “Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder
in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall
backward.”

Footnote 808:

Compare with this the Egyptian representation of the Heaven as woman and
cow.

Footnote 809:

Freud: “Formulierungen über die zwei Prinzipien des psychischen
Geschehens,” 1912 _Jahrbuch_, p. 1 ff.

Footnote 810:

This form of question recalls the well-known Indian symbol of the
world-bearing animal: an elephant standing upon a tortoise. The elephant
has chiefly masculine-phallic significance and the tortoise, like every
shell animal, chiefly feminine significance.

Footnote 811:

_Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, Vol. II, p. 171.

Footnote 812:

The neurotic Don Juan is no evidence to the contrary. That which the
“habitué” understands by love is merely an infirmity and far different
from that which love means!

Footnote 813:

Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,” II, 667.

Footnote 814:

Freud: “Eine Kindheitserinnerung des Leonardo da Vinci,” p. 57: “The
almighty, just God and benevolent nature appear to us as a great
sublimation of father and mother, rather than revivals and reproductions
of the early childish ideas of them. Religiousness leads biologically
back to the long-continued helplessness and need of the offspring of
man, who, when later he has recognized his real loneliness, and weakness
against the great powers of life, feels his condition similar to that of
childhood, and seeks to disavow this forlorn state by regressive renewal
of the infantile protective powers.”

Footnote 815:

Nietzsche: “Fröhliche Wissenschaft,” Aphorism 157. “Mentiri—give
heed!—he muses: immediately he will have a lie prepared. This is a stage
of culture, upon which whole peoples have stood. One should ponder over
what the Romans meant by mentiri!” Actually the Indo-Germanic root
_méntis_, men, is the same for mentiri, memini and mens. See Walde:
“Lat. Etym.,” sub. mendax, memini und mens.

Footnote 816:

See Freud: _Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 60.

Footnote 817:

Bundehesh, XV, 27. The bull Sarsaok was sacrificed at the destruction of
the world. But Sarsaok was the originator of the race of men: he had
brought nine of the fifteen human races upon his back through the sea to
the distant points of the compass. The primitive bull of Gayomart has,
as we saw above, most undoubtedly female and maternal significance on
account of his fertility.

Footnote 818:

If for Silberer the mythological symbolism is a process of cognition on
the mythological stage (_Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 664), then there
exists, between this view and mine, only a difference of standpoint,
which determines a different manner of expression.

Footnote 819:

This series of representations begins with the totem meal.

Footnote 820:

Taurus is astrologically the Domicilium Veneris.

Footnote 821:

There comes from the library of Asurbanipal an interesting
Sumeric-Assyrian fragment (Cuneiform Inscr., I, IV, 26, 6. Quoted by
Gressmann: “Altorient. Text. und Bild.,” I, p. 101):

        “To the wise man he said:
        A lamb is the substitute for a man.
        He gives a lamb for his life,
        He gives the heads of lambs for the heads of men,” etc.

Footnote 822:

Compare the remarkable account in Pausanias: VI, 17, 9 ff. “While
sleeping, the sperma of Zeus has flowed down upon the earth; in time has
arisen from this a demon, with double generative organs; that of a man,
and that of a woman. They gave him the name of Agdistis. But the gods
changed Agdistis and cut off the male organs. Now when the almond tree
which sprang forth from this bore ripe fruit, the daughter of the
spring, Sangarios, took of the fruit. When she placed it in her bosom,
the fruit disappeared at once; but she found herself pregnant. After she
had given birth to the child, a goat acted as protector: when he grew
up, he was of superhuman beauty, so that Agdistis fell in love with the
boy. His relatives sent the full-grown Attis to Pessinus, in order to
marry the king’s daughter. The wedding song was beginning when Agdistis
appeared and in delirium Attis castrated himself.”

Footnote 823:

Beloved of the mother of the gods, inasmuch as the Cybeline Attis sheds
his human shape in this way and stiffens into this tree trunk.

Footnote 824:

Firmicus: “De error. prof. rel.,” XXVIII. Quoted by Robertson: “Evang.
Myths,” p. 136, and Creuzer: “Symbolik,” II, 332.

Footnote 825:

Pentheus, as a hero with a serpent nature; his father was Echion, the
adder.

Footnote 826:

The typical sacrificial death in the Dionysus cult.

Footnote 827:

In the festival processions they wore women’s clothes.

Footnote 828:

In Bithynia Attis was called πάπας (papa, pope) and Cybele, Mã. In the
early Asiatic religions of this mother-goddess, there existed fish
worship and prohibition against fish as food for the priests. In the
Christian religion, it is noteworthy that the son of Atargatis,
identified with Astarte, Cybele, etc., is called Ἰχθύς (Creuzer:
“Symbolik,” II, 60). Therefore, the anagram of the name of Christ =
ΙΕΣΟΥΣ ΧΡΙΣΤΟΣ ΘΕΟΥ ΥΙΟΣ ΣΩΤΕΡ = ΙΧΘΥΣ.

Footnote 829:

Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,” 2, 76.

Footnote 830:

A. Nagel: “Der chinesische Küchengott Tsau-kyun.” _Archiv für
Religionswissenschaft_, XI, 23 ff.

Footnote 831:

In Spiegel’s “Parsigrammatik,” pp. 135, 166.

Footnote 832:

Porphyrius says: ὡς καὶ ὁ ταῦρος δημιουργὸς ὡν ὁ Μίθρας καὶ γενέσεως
δεσπότης (As the bull is the Creator, Mithra is the Lord of birth).

Footnote 833:

The death of the bull is voluntary and involuntary. When Mithra
strangles the bull, a scorpion bites the bull in the testicles (autumn
equinox).

Footnote 834:

Benndorf: “Bildwerke des Lateran Museum,” No. 547.

Footnote 835:

“Textes et Monuments,” I, 182.

Footnote 836:

In another place Cumont speaks of “the sorrowful and almost morbid grace
of the features of the hero.”

Footnote 837:

Infantilism is merely the result of the much deeper state of
introversion of the Christian in contrast to the other religions.

Footnote 838:

The libido nature of the sacrificed is unquestionable. In Persia, a ram
helped the first people to the first sin, cohabitation: it is also the
first animal which they sacrificed (Spiegel: “Erân. Altertumskunde,”
Vol. I, p. 511). The ram is the same as the paradisical serpent, which
was Christ according to the Manichaean version. The ancient Meliton of
Sardes taught that Christ was a lamb, similar to the ram in the bush,
which Abraham sacrificed in place of his son. Here the bush is analogous
to the cross (Fragment V, quoted by Robertson: Ibid).

Footnote 839:

See above. “Blood bridegroom of the mother.” From Joshua v: 2 we learn
that Joshua again instituted the circumcision and redemption of the
first-born: “With this he must have substituted for the sacrifice of
children, which earlier it was the custom to offer up to Jehovah, the
sacrifice of the male foreskin” (Drews: “Christusmythe,” I, p. 47).

Footnote 840:

See Cumont: Ibid., p. 100.

Footnote 841:

The Zodiacal sign of the sun’s greatest heat.

Footnote 842:

This solution apparently concerns only the dogmatic symbolism. I merely
intimate that this sacrificial death was related to a festival of
vegetation or of Spring, from which the religious legend originated. The
folk customs contain in variations these same fundamental thoughts.
(Compare with that Drews: “Christusmythe,” I, p. 37).

Footnote 843:

A similar sacrificial death is that of Prometheus. He was chained to a
rock. In another version his chains were drawn through a pillar, which
hints at the enchainment to a tree. That punishment was his which Christ
took upon himself willingly. The fate of Prometheus therefore recalls
the misfortune of Theseus and Peirithoos, who remain bound to the rock,
the chthonic mother. According to Athenaeus, Jupiter commanded
Prometheus, after he had freed him, to wear a willow crown and an iron
ring, by which his lack of freedom and slavery was symbolically
represented. (Phoroneus, who in Argos was worshipped as the bringer of
fire, was the son of Melia, the ash, therefore tree-enchained.)
Robertson compares the crown of Prometheus to the crown of thorns of
Christ. The devout carry crowns in honor of Prometheus, in order to
represent the captivity (“Evangelical Myths,” p. 126). In this
connection, therefore, the crown means the same as the betrothal ring.
These are the requisites of the old Hierosgamos with the mother; the
crown of thorns (which is of Egyptian derivation according to Athenaeus)
has the significance of the painful ascetic betrothal.

Footnote 844:

Hecate.

Footnote 845:

The spear wound given by Longinus to Christ is the substitute for the
dagger thrust in the Mithraic bull sacrifice: “The jagged tooth of the
brazen wedge” was driven through the breast of the enchained and
sacrificed Prometheus (Aeschylus: “Prometheus”).

Footnote 846:

Mention must also be made of the fact that North German mythology was
acquainted with similar thoughts regarding the fruitfulness of the
sacrificial death on the mother: Through hanging on the tree of life,
Odin obtained knowledge of the Runes and the inspiring, intoxicating
drink which invested him with immortality.

Footnote 847:

I have refrained in the course of this merely orienting investigating
from referring to the countless possibilities of relationship between
dream symbolism and the material disclosed in these connections. That is
a matter of a special investigation. But I cannot forbear mentioning
here a simple dream, the first which a youthful patient brought to me in
the beginning of her analysis. “She stands between high walls of snow
upon a railroad track with her small brother. A train comes, she runs
before it in deadly fear and leaves her brother behind upon the track.
She sees him run over, but after the train has passed, the little fellow
stands up again uninjured.” The meaning of the dream is clear: the
inevitable approach of the “impulse.” The leaving behind of the little
brother is the repressed willingness to accept her destiny. The
acceptance is symbolized by the sacrifice of the little brother (the
infantile personality) whose apparently certain death becomes, however,
a resurrection. Another patient makes use of classical forms: she
dreamed of a mighty eagle, which is wounded in beak and neck by an
arrow. If we go into the actual transference phantasy (eagle =
physician, arrow = erotic wish of the patient), then the material
concerning the eagle (winged lion of St. Mark, the past splendor of
Venice; beak = remembrances of certain perverse actions of childhood)
leads us to understand the eagle as a composition of infantile memories,
which in part are grouped around the father. The eagle, therefore, is an
infantile hero who is wounded in a characteristic manner on the phallic
point (beak). The dream also says: I renounce the infantile wish, I
sacrifice my infantile personality (which is synonymous with: I paralyze
it, castrate the father or the physician). In the Mithra mysteries, in
the introversion the mystic himself becomes ἀετός, the eagle, this being
the highest degree of initiation. The identification with the
unconscious libido animal goes very far in this cult, as Augustine
relates: “alii autem sicut aves alas percutiunt vocem coracis imitantes,
alii vero leonum more fremunt” (Some move the arms like birds the wings,
imitating the voice of the raven, some groan like lions).

Footnote 848:

Miss Miller’s snake is green. The snake of my patient is also green. In
“Psychology of Dementia Praecox,” p. 161, she says: “Then a little green
snake came into my mouth; it had the finest, loveliest sense, as if it
had human understanding; it wanted to say something to me, almost as if
it had wished to kiss me.” Spielrein’s patient says of the snake: “It is
an animal of God, which has such wonderful colors, green, blue and
white. The rattlesnake is green; it is very dangerous. The snake can
have a human mind, it can have God’s judgment; it is a friend of
children. It will save those children who are necessary for the
preservation of human life” (_Jahrbuch_, Vol. III, p. 366). Here the
phallic meaning is unmistakable. The snake as the transformed prince in
the fairy tale has the same meaning. See Riklin: “Wish Fulfilment and
Symbolism in Fairy Tales.”

Footnote 849:

A patient had the phantasy that she was a serpent which coiled around
the mother and finally crept into her.

Footnote 850:

The serpent of Epidaurus is, in contrast, endowed with healing power.
_Similia similibus._

Footnote 851:

This Bleuler has designated as Ambivalence or ambitendency. Stekel as
“Bi-polarity of all psychic phenomena” (“Sprache des Traumes,” p. 535).

Footnote 852:

I am indebted for permission to publish a picture of this statuette to
the kindness of the director of the Veronese collection of antiques.

Footnote 853:

The “Deluge” is of one nature with the serpent. In the Wöluspa it is
said that the flood is produced when the Midgard serpent rises up for
universal destruction. He is called “Jörmungandr,” which means,
literally, “the all-pervading wolf.” The destroying Fenris wolf has also
a connection with the sea. Fen is found in Fensalir (Meersäle), the
dwelling of Frigg, and originally meant sea (Frobenius: Ibid., p. 179).
In the fairy stories of Red Riding Hood, a wolf is substituted in place
of a serpent or fish.

Footnote 854:

Compare the longing of Hölderlin expressed in his poem “Empedocles.”
Also the journey to hell of Zarathustra through the crater of the
volcano. Death is the entrance into the mother, therefore the Egyptian
king, Mykerinos, buried his daughter in a gilded wooden cow. That was
the guarantee of rebirth. The cow stood in a state apartment and
sacrifices were brought to it. In another apartment near the cow were
placed the images of the concubines of Mykerinos (Herodotus, II, p. 129
f).

Footnote 855:

Kluge: “Deutsche Etymologie.”

Footnote 856:

The whistling and snapping is a tasteless, archaic relic, an allurement
for the theriomorphic divinity, probably also an infantile reminiscence
(quieting the child by whistling and snapping). Of similar significance
is the roaring at the divinity. (“Mithr. Lit.,” p. 13): “You are to look
at him and give forth a long roar, as with a horn, using all your
breath, pressing your sides, and kiss the amulet ... etc.” “My soul
roars with the voice of a hungry lion,” says Mechthild von Magdeburg.
“As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after
God.”—_Psalms_ xlii: 2. The ceremonial custom, as so often happens, has
dwindled into a figure of speech. Dementia praecox, however, revivifies
the old custom, as in the “Roaring miracle” of Schreber. See the
latter’s “Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken,” by which he demands
that God, i.e. the Father, so inadequately oriented with humanity, take
notice of his existence.

The infantile reminiscence is clear, that is, the childish cry to
attract the attention of the parent to himself; the whistling and
smacking for the allurement of the theriomorphic attribute, the “helpful
animal.” (See Rank: “The Myth of the Birth of the Hero.”)




                                 INDEX


Abegg, 182

Abélard, 16

Abraham, 6, 29, 143, 151, 162

Activity, displaced rhythmic, 160

Adaptation to environment, 14

Agni, 164, 185

Agriculture, 173

Aitareyopanishad, 178

Ambitendency, 194

Amenhotep IV, 106

Analogy, importance of, 156

Analysis of dreams, 9

Antiquity, brutality of, 258

Anxiety, representations of, 292

Arnold, Sir Edwin, 273, 355

Art, instinct of, 145
  first, 177

Asceticism, 91

Asterius, Bishop, 375

Augustine, 90, 114

Autismus, 152

Autoerotism, 176

Autonomy, moral, 262

Avenarius, R., 146

Aztec, 205


Baldwin, Mark, 17

Baptism, 357

Bergerac, Cyrano de, 43, 60, 119

Bergson, Henri, 314

Bertschinger, 203

Bhagavad-Gîtâ, 195

Bingen, Hildegarde von, 101

Bleuler, Prof., 152, 194

“Book of the Dead, Egyptian,” 278, 289, 314

Boring, act of, 157, 177

Bousset, 402

Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad, 174, 178, 313, 466

Bruno, Giordano, 25

Buddha, 273, 323, 344, 355

Bundehesh, 277

Burckhardt, Jacob, 40, 83

Byron’s “Heaven and Earth,” 117


Cæsar, Julius, 317

Cannegieter, 281

Causation, law of, 59

Cave worship, 375

Chidher, 216, 219

Child, development of, 461

Childhood, valuations, 211

Children, analysis of, 207
  regression in, 462

Christ, 30, 90, 135, 185, 217, 219, 225, 245, 252, 278, 344, 357, 372
  and Antichrist, 403
  death and resurrection, 449
  sacrifice of, 475

Christianity, 78, 80, 85, 255

Chrysostomus, John, 113

Cicero, 136

City, mother symbolism of, 234, 241

Cohabitation, continuous, 236, 298

Coitus play, 167
  wish, meaning of, 339

Communion cup, 410

Complex, 37
  law of return, 56, 67
  mass, 43
  mother, 208
  nuclear, 195
  of representation, 70, 76, 95

Compulsion, unconscious, 454

Condensation, 6

Conflict, internal, 196, 328

Consciousness, birth of, 361

Creation, by means of thought, 58, 62
  ideal, 64
  from introversion, 416, 456
  from mother, 286, 371
  through sacrifice, 466

Creuzer, 268

Cross, 264, 278
  meaning of, 296

Cult, Father-Son, 166
  Earth, 173

Cumont, Franz, 83, 221, 225, 450, 473
Cyrano de Bergerac, 43, 60, 119, 317


Dactyli, 132

Death, fear of, 304, 434
  phantasies, 117
  voluntary, 423
  wish for, 320, 419

Dementia præcox, 141, 159, 461

Destiny of man, 390, 427

Deussen, 415, 466

Dieterich, 376, 450

Dismemberment, motive of, 267

Displaced rhythmic activity, 160

Domestication of man, 267, 304

Dragon, psychologic meaning, 402, 410

Dream, analysis, 9
  interpretation of, 8
  Nietzsche, 28
  regression, 26
  sexual assault, 10
  sexual language of, 433
  source of, 9
  symbolism, 8, 12, 233

Drews, 147

Drexler, 275


Eleusinian mysteries, 373

Emmerich, Katherine, 322

Erman, 106

Erotic fate, 117
  impression, 54, 67

Eusebius of Alexandria, 114

Evolution, 144


Fairy tales, interpretation of, 281

Family, separation from, 344

Fasting, 369

Father, 62, 98, 293
  Imago, 55
  transference, 71

Faust, 68, 88, 130, 181, 231, 245, 250, 283, 305, 349

Fear, as forbidden desire, 389

Ferenczi, 47, 146

Ferrero, Guglielmo, 34

Finger sucking, 177

Firdusi, 315

Fire, onanistic phase of, 174
  preparations of, 163, 165, 172
  sexual significance, 167, 172

Firmicus, 379, 419

Flournoy, 37

France, Anatole, 15, 37

Francis of Assisi, 97

Frazer (“Golden Bough”), 367, 478

Freud, Sigmund, 12, 26, 29, 35, 37, 67, 71, 73, 81, 133, 139, 151, 189,
   232, 281, 367, 421, 459
  interpretation of the dream, 3
  “Leonardo da Vinci,” 7
  source of the dream, 9

Frobenius, 237, 275, 280, 436


Galileo, 146

Gilgamesh, 365

God, as creator and destroyer, 70
  as sun, 127
  “becoming one with,” 96
  crucified, 295
  fertilizing, 348
  love of, 200
  of creation, 69, 394
  vs. erotic, 94

Goethe, 417

Gunkel, 286


Hand, erotic use of, 176
  symbolism of, 206

Hartmann, 198

Hauptmann, Gerhart, 330

Hecate, mysteries of, 403

Heine, 353

Helios, 96, 110, 221

Herd instinct, 201

Hero, 32, 191, 200, 379
  as wanderer, 231
  betrayal of, 38
  birth of, 356
  psychologic meaning, 135
  sacrifice of, 452
  teleological meaning, 347

Herodotus, 290

Herzog, 408

Hesiod, 147

Hiawatha, song of, 346

Hierosgamos, 274, 376

Hölderlin, 182, 435, 436, 437, 440, 442, 443, 444, 445, 448, 452

Homosexuality, 34

Honegger, 108, 154

Humboldt, 349

Hypnagogic vision, 197


Idea, independence of, 84

Iliad, 274

Imago, Father, 55

Immortality, 227, 427

Incest barrier, 72, 100, 266, 458, 461
  phantasy, 3, 63, 404
  problem, 171, 195, 230, 250, 289, 364, 454, 463

Incestuous component, 172

Independence, battle for, 344

Infantilism, 319, 431, 479

Inman, 184, 236

Introjection, 146

Introversion, 37, 50, 98, 193, 201, 329, 367, 415
  hysterical, 151
  willed, 336

Isis, 96, 264


Jaehns, 311

James, William, 21

Janet, Pierre, 142

Jensen, 225

Jew, Wandering, 215, 225

Job, Book of, 58, 60, 68, 326

Jodl, 17

Joël, Karl, 360

Jones, 6


Kathopanishad, 130

Kepler, 25

Kluge, 409

Koran, 216

Kuhn, Adalbert, 162

Kulpe, 21


Laistner, 281

Lajard, 229

Lamia, 280

Language, 15
  vs. Speech, 16

Legends, Judas, 37

Lenclos, Ninon de, 4

Libido, 20, 47, 67, 71, 78, 94, 96, 101, 120, 128, 157, 193, 228, 249
  as hero, 417
  definition of, 135
  descriptive conception, 144
  desexualized, 149
  genetic conception, 144
  in opposition, 292, 308, 329
  in resistance, 422
  introverting, 415
  liberation of, 420
  mother, 289, 469, 474
  repressed objects of, 203
  transference of, 368
  transformation of, 171

Licentiousness, 258

Life, fear of, 335
  natural conception of, 343

Lilith, 279

Logos, 63

Lombroso, 212

Longfellow’s “Hiawatha,” 346

Lord’s Supper, 372

Love, 193
  infantile, 431

Lucius, 106


Macrobius, 226, 314

Maeder, 6

Maeterlinck, 64

Magdeburg, Mechthild von, 190, 314

Manilius, 182

Mary, 283, 302

Matthew, Gospel of, 92

Maurice, 297

Mauthner, Franz, 19

Maya, 283

Mayer, Robert, 138

Mead, 109

Meliton, 113

Mereschkowski, 403

Messiah, 79

Miller, Miss Frank, 41

Milton, 52

Mind, archaic tendencies, 35
  infantile, 36

Mithra, 104, 110, 217, 221, 245, 278, 293, 372, 450, 471

Mithracism, 78, 82, 85, 89, 96, 101, 108, 221, 225, 269, 314

Moral autonomy, 262

Mother, 98, 230, 241, 283
  heavens as, 301, 456
  imago, 250, 303, 319
  libido, 469, 474
  longing for, 335, 371, 428
  love, 338
  of humanity, 201
  terrible, 196, 202, 243, 267, 280, 364, 405
  transference, 71
  twofold, 356, 387, 428
  wisdom of, 452

Motive of dismemberment, 267
  embracing and entwining, 272

Mörike, 11, 354

Mouth, erotic importance of, 176
  as instrument of speech, 176

Müller, 295

Music, origin of, 165

Mysticism, 101

Mythology, 24, 240
  Hindoo, 128

Myths, as dream images, 29
  of rebirth, 272
  religious, 262


Nakedness, cult of, 412

Naming, importance of, 208

Narcissus state, 337

Neuroses, hysteria and compulsion, 142

Nietzsche, 16, 23, 28, 72, 102, 104, 195, 327, 328, 337, 345, 414, 417,
   418, 420, 423, 434, 447
  on dreams, 28

Nodfyr, 166


Oedipus, 3, 202

Oegger, Abbi, 37

Onanism, 158, 175, 186

Osiris, 264, 436

Ovid, 325, 373, 469


“Paradise Lost,” 52

Paranoia, 140

Paranoidian mechanism, 73

Pausanias, 274

Persecution, fear of, 332

Personality, dissociated, 37

Peter, 221, 222

Pfister, 6, 56

Phallic, cult, 33
  symbolism, 228, 248, 310

Phallus, 105, 132
  negative, 334
  Sun, 108

Phantasy, how created, 31
  infantile, 462
  onanistic, 175
  sexual, 140
  source of, 32, 460
  thinking, 22

Philo of Alexandria, 113, 315

Pick, 37

Pindar, 325

Plato, 147, 388
  Symposium, 34, 298

Plotinus, 147

Plutarch, 311, 375, 436

Poe, 66

Polytheism, 106

Pope, Roman, 200

Preiswerk, Samuel, 378

Presexual stage, 161, 171, 369

Primitive, reduction to, 259

Procreation, self, 358

Projection, 73

Prometheus, 162

Psychic energy, 142

Psychoanalysis, 75, 421
  object of, 479

Psychoanalytic thinking, 257

Psychology, unconscious, 197

Psychopathology, 50


Ramayana, 239

Rank, 6, 12, 29, 356

“Raven, The,” 66

Reality, adaptation to, 461
  corrective of, 146, 261
  function of, 144, 150, 416
  principle of, 146

Rebirth, 240, 251, 272, 351
  battle for, 364

Regression, 26, 27, 172, 173
  to the mother, 369

Religion, benefits of, 99
  and morality, 85
  as a pose, 82, 260
  sexuality, 78
  source of, 474
  vs. orgies, 412

Renan, 127

Renunciation, 444

Repression, 6, 67, 73, 150, 161, 342

Resistance, 196

Resistance to primitive sexuality, 156

Revelation, 111, 244

Rhythm, sexual, 165

Rigveda, 165, 247, 367, 393, 415, 416, 456, 465

Riklin, 6, 29, 281

Robertson, 378

Rochefoucauld, La, 195

Rodhe, 376, 407

Roscher, 326

Rose, symbolism of, 436

Rostand, 43

Rudra, 128


Sacrifice, 287, 294, 391, 452, 465, 478
  Christian vs. Mithraic, 478
  of bull, 473
  retrogressive longing, 453, 465

Sainthood, difficulty of, 322

Schmid, 188

Scholasticism, 22

Schopenhauer, 16, 136, 146, 198, 416, 467, 480

Science, 23, 84
  vs. Mythology, 24

Self-consciousness, creation of, 303

Self-control, 73

Seneca, 78, 83, 85, 96

Sentimentality, 474

Serpent, 292

Sexual assault dream, 10
  impulse, derivatives of, 144, 149
  problem, treatment of, 454

Sexuality, and nutrition, 161
  and religion, 78
  cult of, 256
  importance of, 342
  resistance to primitive, 156, 170

Shakespeare, 317
  “Shvetâshvataropanishad,” 128
  “Siegfried,” Wagner’s, 391

Silberer, 6, 234

Snake, phallic meaning of, 110, 413
  as symbol of death, 408

Sodomy, 34

Soma, 185

Somnambulism, intentional, 192

Sophocles, 332

Soul, conception of, 299

Speech, 14
  origin of, 178

Sphinx, 202

Spielrein, 154, 449

St. Augustine, 82

Stage, presexual, 161, 171, 369

Steinthal, 156

Stekel, 12

Subject vs. object, 360

Sublimation, 64, 150, 254

Suckling, act of, 160

Sun, 95, 217, 223, 390, 427
  as God, 99, 127
  energy, 128
  hero, 112, 115, 191, 231
  night journey of, 237
  phallus, 108
  worship, 114

Surrogates, archaic, 154

Symbolism, Christian, 115
  Christian vs. Mithraic, 478
  of arrow, 321, 366
  „ city, 234, 241
  „ crowd, 233
  „ dreams, 8, 12
  „ eating, 372
  „ every-day thought, 13
  „ eyes, 301
  „ fish, 223
  „ forest, 307
  „ horse, 308
  „ libido, 105
  „ light, 112
  „ moon, 352
  „ mother, 241, 278
  „ mystery, 233
  „ serpent, 333, 414, 417, 479
  „ sun, 390
  „ sword, 393
  „ trees, 246, 264, 385
  phallic, 33, 228, 248

Symbols, use of, 249, 262, 400

Symean, 101


Tertullian, 114

Theatre, 43

Thinking, 13
  act of, 459
  archaic, 28
  directed or logical, 14, 36
  dream, 22
  intensive, 13
  limitations of, 19
  of children, 27
  origin of, 465
  phantastic, 22, 31, 36
  psychoanalytic, 257

Time, symbol of, 313

Transference, 75, 76, 171, 201
  real, 77, 78, 84
  to nature, 82

Transformation, 155

Treading, symbolic meaning of, 349

Treasure, difficult to attain, 186, 365
  guardian of, 293, 408

Tree of Death, 278

Tree of Life, 246

Trinity, 147, 225


Unconscious, 197, 201

Upanishad, 131, 247, 466


Verlaine, Paul, 483

Vinci, Leonardo da, 7, 403

Virgil, 90

Virgin Mother, 63

Vollers, 221


Wagner’s “Siegfried,” 391

Waitz, 353

Water, symbolism of, 244, 384, 388

Watschandies, 167

Weber, 165

Will, conception of, 146
  duality of, 194
  original division of, 171

Wind as creator, 108, 354

Wirth, 115

Woman, misunderstood, 342

Work as a duty, 455

World as mother, 456

Wundt, 17


Zarathustra, 423

Zend Avesta, 464

Zosimos vision, 416

Zöckler, 278, 296

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. P. 113, changed “cuis” to “cuius”.
 2. P. 113, changed “phopheta” to “propheta”.
 3. P. 144, changed “genetic definition of the libido” to “generic
    definition of the libido”.
 4. P. 520, changed “αὸν” to “σόν”.
 5. P. 548, changed “κεὺθω” to “κεύθω”.
 6. P. 549, changed “he pieced them” to “he pierced them”.
 7. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 8. Archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as printed.
 9. Footnotes were re-indexed using numbers and the page footnotes were
    collected together with the end notes.
10. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.


        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Theory of Psychoanalysis
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Theory of Psychoanalysis


Author: C. G. Jung

Release date: August 11, 2021 [eBook #66041]

Language: English

Credits: Turgut Dincer, David King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THEORY OF PSYCHOANALYSIS ***



                      The Theory of Psychoanalysis




                  Nervous and Mental Disease Monograph
                             Series, No. 19

                      The Theory of Psychoanalysis

                                   BY
                             DR. C. G. JUNG
                               of Zurich


                                NEW YORK

               THE JOURNAL OF NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE
                           PUBLISHING COMPANY

                                  1915




    NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE
    MONOGRAPH SERIES

    Edited by

    Drs. SMITH ELY JELLIFFE and WM. A. WHITE
    Numbers Issued


    1. Outlines of Psychiatry. (4th Edition.) $3.00.

    By Dr. William A. White.

    2. Studies in Paranoia.

    By Drs. N. Gierlich and M. Friedman.

    3. The Psychology of Dementia Praecox. (Out of Print).

    By Dr. C. G Jung.

    4. Selected Papers on Hysteria and other Psychoneuroses
    (2d Edition.) $2.50.

    By Prof. Sigmund Freud.

    5. The Wassermann Serum Diagnosis in Psychiatry. $2.00.

    By Dr. Felix Plaut.

    6. Epidemic Poliomyelitis. New York, 1907. (Out of Print).

    7. Three Contributions to Sexual Theory. $2.00.

    By Prof. Sigmund Freud.

    8. Mental Mechanisms. $2.00. By Dr. Wm. A. White.

    9. Studies in Psychiatry. $2.00.

    New York Psychiatrical Society.

    10. Handbook of Mental Examination Methods. $2.00.

    By Shepherd Ivory Franz.

    11. The Theory of Schizophrenic Negativism. $0.60.

    By Professor E. Bleuler.

    12. Cerebellar Functions. $3.00.

    By Dr. André-Thomas.

    13. History of Prison Psychoses. $1.25.

    By Drs. P. Nitsche and K. Wilmanns.

    14. General Paresis. $3.00.        By Prof. E. Kraepelin.

    15. Dreams and Myths. $1.00.         By Dr. Karl Abraham.

    16. Poliomyelitis. $3.00.                Dr. I. Wickmann.

    17. Freud’s Theories of the Neuroses. $2.00.

    Dr. E. Hitschmann.

    18. The Myth of the Birth of the Hero. $1.00.

    Dr. Otto Rank

    19. The Theory of Psychoanalysis. $1.50.

    Dr. C. G. Jung.

                          Copyright, 1915, by
               THE JOURNAL OF NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE
                      PUBLISHING COMPANY, NEW YORK

                                PRESS OF
                      THE NEW ERA PRINTING COMPANY
                             LANCASTER, PA.




                                CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION 1

CHAPTER I

CONSIDERATION OF EARLY HYPOTHESES 4

CHAPTER II

THE INFANTILE SEXUALITY 17

CHAPTER III

THE CONCEPTION OF LIBIDO 27

CHAPTER IV

THE ETIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE INFANTILE SEXUALITY 45

CHAPTER V

THE UNCONSCIOUS 55

CHAPTER VI

THE DREAM 60

CHAPTER VII

THE CONTENT OF THE UNCONSCIOUS 67

CHAPTER VIII

THE ETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES 72

CHAPTER IX

THE THERAPEUTICAL PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOANALYSIS 96

CHAPTER X

SOME GENERAL REMARKS ON PSYCHOANALYSIS 111




                              INTRODUCTION


In these lectures I have attempted to reconcile my practical experiences
in psychoanalysis with the existing theory, or rather, with the
approaches to such a theory. Here is my attitude towards those
principles which my honored teacher Sigmund Freud has evolved from the
experience of many decades. Since I have long been closely connected
with psychoanalysis, it will perhaps be asked with astonishment how it
is that I am now for the first time defining my theoretical position.
When, some ten years ago, it came home to me what a vast distance Freud
had already travelled beyond the bounds of contemporary knowledge of
psycho-pathological phenomena, especially the psychology of the complex
mental processes, I no longer felt myself in a position to exercise any
real criticism. I did not possess the sorry mandarin-courage of those
people who—upon a basis of ignorance and incapacity—consider themselves
justified in “critical” rejections. I thought one must first work
modestly for years in such a field before one might dare to criticize.
The evil results of premature and superficial criticism have certainly
not been lacking. A preponderating number of critics have attacked with
as much anger as ignorance. Psychoanalysis has flourished undisturbed
and has not troubled itself one jot or tittle about the unscientific
chatter that has buzzed around it. As everyone knows, this tree has
waxed mightily, and not in one world only, but alike in Europe and in
America. Official criticism participates in the pitiable fate of
Proktophantasmist and his lamentation in the Walpurgis-night:

             “You still are here? Nay, ’tis a thing unheard!
             Vanish at once! We’ve said the enlightening word.”

Such criticism has omitted to take to heart the truth that all that
exists has sufficient right to its existence: no less is it with
psychoanalysis.

We will not fall into the error of our opponents, nor ignore their
existence nor deny their right to exist. But then this enjoins upon
ourselves the duty of applying a proper criticism, grounded upon a
practical knowledge of the facts. To me it seems that psychoanalysis
stands in need of this weighing-up from the inside.

It has been wrongly assumed that my attitude denotes a “split” in the
psychoanalytic movement. Such a schism can only exist where faith is
concerned. But psychoanalysis deals with knowledge and its ever-changing
formulations. I have taken William James’ pragmatic rule as a
plumb-line: “You must bring out of each word its practical cash-value,
set it at work within the stream of your experience. It appears less a
solution, then, than as a program for more work and more particularly as
an indication of the ways in which existing realities may be changed.
_Theories thus become instruments, not answers to enigmas, in which we
can rest._ We don’t lie back upon them, we move forward, and, on
occasion, make nature over again by their aid.”

And so my criticism has not proceeded from academic arguments, but from
experiences which have forced themselves on me during ten years earnest
work in this sphere. I know that my experience in no wise approaches
Freud’s quite extraordinary experience and insight, but none the less it
seems to me that certain of my formulations do present the observed
facts more adequately than is the case in Freud’s method of statement.
At any rate I have found, in my teaching, that the conceptions put
forward in these lectures have afforded peculiar aid in my endeavors to
help my pupils to an understanding of psychoanalysis. With such
experience I am naturally inclined to assent to the view of Mr. Dooley,
that witty humorist of the _New York Times_, when he says, defining
pragmatism: “Truth is truth ‘when it works.’” I am indeed very far from
regarding a modest and moderate criticism as a “falling away” or a
schism; on the contrary, through it I hope to help on the flowering and
fructification of the psychoanalytic movement, and to open a path
towards the scientific treasures of psychoanalysis for those who have
hitherto been unable to possess themselves of psychoanalytic methods,
whether through lack of practical experience or through distaste of the
theoretical hypothesis.

For the opportunity to deliver these lectures I have to thank my friend
Dr. Smith Ely Jelliffe, of New York, who kindly invited me to take part
in the “Extension Course” at Fordham University. These lectures were
given in September, 1912, in New York.

I must here also express my best thanks to Dr. Gregory, of Bellevue
Hospital, for his ready support of my clinical demonstrations.

For the troublesome work of translation I am greatly indebted to my
assistant, Miss M. Moltzer, and to Mrs. Edith Eder and Dr. Eder of
London.

Only after the preparation of these lectures did Adler’s book, “Ueber
den nervösen Character,” become known to me, in the summer of 1912. I
recognize that he and I have reached similar conclusions on various
points, but here is not the place to go into a more intimate discussion
of the matter; that must take place elsewhere.




                               CHAPTER I
                   Consideration of Early Hypotheses


It is not an easy task to speak about psychoanalysis in these days. I am
not thinking, when I say this, of the fact that psychoanalysis in
general—it is my earnest conviction—is among the most difficult
scientific problems of the day. But even when we put this cardinal fact
aside, we find many serious difficulties which interfere with the clear
interpretation of the matter. I am not capable of giving you a complete
doctrine elaborated both from the theoretical and the empirical
standpoint. Psychoanalysis has not yet reached such a point of
development, although a great amount of labor has been expended upon it.
Neither can I give you a description of its growth ab ovo, for you
already have in your country, with its great regard for all the progress
of civilization, a considerable literature on the subject. This
literature has already spread a general knowledge of psychoanalysis
among those who have a scientific interest in it.

You have had the opportunity of listening to Freud, the real explorer
and founder of this method, who has spoken in your own country about
this theory. As for myself, I have already had the honor of speaking
about this work in America. I have discussed the experimental foundation
of the theory of complexes and the application of psychoanalysis to
pedagogy.

It can be easily understood that under these circumstances I fear to
repeat what has already been said, or published in many scientific
journals in this country. A further difficulty lies in the fact that in
very many quarters there are already prevailing quite extraordinary
conceptions of our theory, conceptions which are often absolutely wrong,
and unfortunately wrong just in that which touches the very essence of
psychoanalysis. At times it seems nearly impossible to grasp even the
meaning of these errors, and I am constantly astonished to find any one
with a scientific education ever arriving at ideas so divorced from all
foundations in fact. Obviously it would be of no importance to cite
examples of these curiosities, and it will be more valuable to discuss
here those questions and problems of psychoanalysis which really might
provoke misunderstanding.


                A Change in the Theory of Psychoanalysis


Although it has very often been repeated, it seems to be still an
unknown fact to many people, that in these last years the theory of
psychoanalysis has changed considerably. Those, for instance, who have
only read the first book, “Studies in Hysteria,” by Breuer and Freud,
still believe that psychoanalysis essentially consists in the doctrine
that hysteria, as well as other neuroses, has its root in the so-called
“traumata,” or shocks, of earliest childhood. They continue to condemn
this theory, and have no idea that it is fifteen years since this
conception was abandoned and replaced by a totally different one. This
change is of such great importance in the whole development of
psychoanalysis, as well for its technique as for its theory, that I must
give it in some detail. That I may not weary you with the complete
recitation of cases already well known, I will only just refer to those
in Breuer and Freud’s book, which I shall assume are known to you, for
the book has been translated into English.[1] You will there have read
that case of Breuer’s, to which Freud referred in his lectures at Clark
University. You will have found that the hysterical symptom has not some
unknown organic source, but is based on certain highly emotional psychic
events, so-called injuries of the heart, traumata or shocks. I think
that now-a-days every careful observer of hysteria will acknowledge from
his own experience that, at the root of this disease, such painful
events are to be found. This truth was already known to the physicians
of former days.


                          The Traumatic Theory


So far as I know it was really Charcot who, probably under the influence
of Page’s theory of nervous shock, made this observation of theoretical
value. Charcot knew, by means of hypnotism, at that time not understood,
that hysterical symptoms could be called forth by suggestion as well as
made to disappear through suggestion. Charcot believed that he saw
something like this in those cases of hysteria caused by accident, cases
which became more and more frequent. The shock can be compared with
hypnosis in Charcot’s sense. The emotion provoked by the shock causes a
momentary complete paralysis of will-power, during which the remembrance
of the trauma can be fixed as an auto-suggestion. This conception gives
us the original theory of psychoanalysis. Etiological investigation had
to prove whether this mechanism, or a similar one, was also to be found
in those cases of hysteria which could not be called traumatic. This
lack of knowledge of the etiology of hysteria was supplied by the
discovery of Breuer and Freud. They proved that even in those ordinary
cases of hysteria which cannot be said to be caused by shock the same
trauma-element was to be found, and seemed to have an etiological value.
It is natural that Freud, a pupil of Charcot, was inclined to suppose
that this discovery in itself confirmed the ideas of Charcot.
Accordingly the theory elaborated out of the experience of that period,
mainly by Freud, received the imprint of a traumatic etiology. The name
of trauma-theory is therefore justified; nevertheless this theory had
also a new aspect. I am not here speaking of the truly admirable
profoundness and precision of Freud’s analysis of symptoms, but of the
relinquishing of the conception of auto-suggestion, which was the
dynamic force in the original theory, and its substitution by a detailed
exposure of the psychological and psycho-physical effects caused by the
shock. The shock, the trauma, provokes a certain excitation which, under
normal circumstances, finds a natural outlet (“abreagieren”). In
hysteria it is only to a certain extent that the excitation does find a
natural outlet; a partial retention takes place, the so-called blocking
of the affect (“Affecteinklemmung”). This amount of excitation, which
can be compared with an amount of potential energy, is transmuted by the
mechanism of conversion into “physical” symptoms.

_The Cathartic Method._—According to this conception, therapy had to
find the means by which those retained emotions could be brought to a
mode of expression, thereby setting free from the symptoms that amount
of repressed and converted feeling. Hence this was called the cleansing,
or _cathartic method_; its aim was to discharge the blocked emotions.
From this it follows that analysis was then more or less closely
concerned with the symptoms, that is to say, the symptoms were
analyzed—the work of analysis began with the symptoms, a method
abandoned to-day. The cathartic method, and the theory on which it is
based, are, as you know, accepted by other colleagues, so far as they
are interested at all in psychoanalysis, and you will find some
appreciation and quotation of the theory, as well as of the method, in
several text-books.


                    The Traumatic Theory Criticized


Although, as a matter of fact, the discovery of Breuer and Freud is
certainly true, as can easily be proved by every case of hysteria,
several objections can be raised to the theory. It must be acknowledged
that their method shows with wonderful clearness the connection between
the actual symptoms and the shock, as well as the psychological
consequences which necessarily follow from the traumatic event, but
nevertheless, a doubt arises as to the etiological significance of the
so-called trauma or shock.

It is extremely difficult for any critical observer of hysteria to admit
that a neurosis, with all its complications, can be based on events in
the past, as it were on one emotional experience long past. It is more
or less fashionable at present to consider all abnormal psychic
conditions, in so far as they are of exogenic growth, as the
consequences of hereditary degeneration, and not as essentially
influenced by the psychology of the patient and the environment. This
conception is too narrow, and not justified by the facts. To use an
analogy, we know perfectly well how to find the right middle course in
dealing with the etiology of tuberculosis. There are, of course, cases
of tuberculosis where in earliest childhood the germ of the disease
falls upon a soil predisposed by heredity, so that even in the most
favorable conditions the patient cannot escape his fate. None the less,
there are also cases where, under favorable conditions, illness can be
prevented, despite a predisposition to the disease. Nor must we forget
that there are still other cases without hereditary disposition or
individual inclination, and, in spite of this, fatal infection occurs.
All this holds equally true of the neuroses, where matters are not
essentially different in their method of procedure than they are in
general pathology. Neither a theory in which the predisposition is
all-important, nor one in which the influence of the environment is
all-important, will ever suffice. It is true the shock-theory can be
said to give predominance to the predisposition, even insisting that
some past trauma is the condition sine qua non of the neurosis. Yet
Freud’s ingenious empiricism presented even in the “Studies in Hysteria”
some views, insufficiently exploited at the time, which contained the
elements of a theory that perhaps more accentuates the value of
environment than inherited or traumatic predisposition.


                     The Conception of “Repression”


Freud synthesized these observations in a form that was to extend far
beyond the limits of the shock-theory. This conception is the hypothesis
of repression (“Verdrängung”). As you know, by the word “repression” is
understood the psychic mechanism of the re-transportation of a conscious
thought into the unconscious sphere. We call this sphere the
“unconscious” and define it as the psyche of which we are not conscious.
The conception of repression was derived from the numerous observations
made upon neurotic patients who seemed to have the capacity of
forgetting important events or thoughts, and this to such an extent that
one might easily believe nothing had ever happened. These observations
can be constantly made by anyone who comes into close psychological
relations with his patients. As a result of the Breuer and Freud
studies, it was found that a very special method was needed to call
again into consciousness those traumatic events long since forgotten. I
wish to call attention to this fact, since it is decidedly astonishing
for a priori we are not inclined to believe that valuable things can
ever be forgotten. For this reason several critics object that the
reminiscences which have been called into consciousness by certain
hypnotic processes are only suggested ones, and do not correspond with
reality. Even granting this, it would certainly not be justifiable to
regard this in itself as a condemnation of “repression,” since there are
and have been not a few cases where the fact of repressed reminiscences
can be proved by objective demonstration. Even if we exclude this kind
of proof, it is possible to test the phenomena by experiment. The
association-tests provide us with the necessary experiences. Here we
find the extraordinary fact that associations pertaining to complexes
saturated with emotion emerge with much greater difficulty into
consciousness, and are much more easily forgotten.

As my experiments on this subject were never reëxamined, the conclusions
were never adopted, until just lately, when Wilhelm Peters, a disciple
of Kraepelin, proved in general my previous observation, namely, that
painful events are very rarely correctly reproduced (“die unlustbetonten
Erlebnisse werden am seltensten richtig reproduciert”).

As you see, the conception rests upon a firm empirical basis. There is
still another side of the question worth looking at. We might ask if the
repression has its root in a conscious determination of the individual,
or do the reminiscences disappear rather passively without conscious
knowledge on the part of the patient? In Freud’s works you will find a
series of excellent proofs of the existence of a conscious tendency to
repress what is painful. Every psychoanalyst will know more than a dozen
cases showing clearly in their history one particular moment at least in
which the patient knows more or less clearly that he will not allow
himself to think of the repressed reminiscences. A patient once gave
this significant answer: “Je l’ai mis de côté” (I have put it aside).

But, on the other hand, we must not forget that there are a number of
cases where it is impossible for us to show, even with the most careful
examination, the slightest trace of conscious repression; in these cases
it seems as if the mechanism of repression were much more in the nature
of a passive disappearance, or even as if the impressions were dragged
beneath the surface by some force operating from below. From the first
class of cases we get the impression of complete mental development,
accompanied by a kind of cowardice in regard to their own feelings; but
among the second class of cases you may find patients showing a more
serious retardation of development. The mechanism of repression seems
here to be much more an automatic one.

This difference is closely connected with the question I mentioned
before—that is, the question of the relative importance of
predisposition and environment. The first class of cases appears to be
mainly influenced by environment and education; in the other,
predisposition seems to play the chief part. It is pretty clear where
treatment will have more effect. (As I have already said, the conception
of repression contains an element which is in intrinsic contradiction
with the shock-theory.) We find, for instance, in the case of Miss Lucy
R.,[2] described by Freud, that the essential etiological moment is not
to be found in the traumatic scenes, but in the insufficient readiness
of the patient to set store upon the convictions passing through her
mind. But if we think of the later views we find in the “Selected Papers
on Hysteria,”[3] where Freud, forced through further experience,
supposes certain traumatic sexual events in early childhood to be the
source of the neurosis, then we get the impression of an incongruity
between the conception of repression and that of shock. The conception
of “repression” contains the elements of an etiological theory of
environment, while the conception of “shock” is a theory of
predisposition.

But at first the theory of neurosis developed along the lines of the
trauma conception. Pursuing Freud’s later investigations, we see him
coming to the conclusion that no such positive value can be ascribed to
the traumatic events of later life, as their effects could only be
conceivable if the particular predisposition of the patient were taken
into account. Evidently the enigma was to be resolved just at this
point. As the analytical work progressed, the roots of hysterical
symptoms were found in childhood; they reached back from the present far
into the past. The further end of the chain threatened to get lost in
the mists of early childhood. But it was just there that reminiscences
appeared of certain scenes where sexual activities had been manifested
in an active or passive way, and these were unmistakably connected with
the events which provoked the neurosis. (For further details of these
events you must consult the works of Freud, as well as the numerous
analyses which have already been published.)


                The Theory of Sexual Trauma in Childhood


Hence arose the theory of sexual trauma in childhood which provoked
bitter opposition, not from theoretical objections against the
shock-theory in general, but against the element of sexuality in
particular. In the first place, the idea that children might be sexual,
and that sexual thoughts might play any part with them, aroused great
antagonism. In the second place, the possibility that hysteria had a
sexual basis was most unwelcome, for the sterile position that hysteria
was either a reflex neurosis of the uterus or arose from lack of sexual
satisfaction had just been given up. Naturally, therefore, the real
value of Freud’s observations was disputed. If critics had limited
themselves to that question, and had not adorned their opposition with
moral indignation, a calm discussion would have been possible. In
Germany, for instance, this method of attack made it impossible to get
any credit for Freud’s theory. As soon as the question of sexuality was
touched general resistance, as well as haughty contempt were awakened.
But in truth there was but one question at issue: were Freud’s
observations true or not? That alone could be of importance to a really
scientific mind. It is possible that these observations do not seem very
probable at first sight, but it is unjustifiable to condemn them a
priori as false. Wherever really sincere and thorough investigations
have been carried out it has been possible to corroborate his
observations. The fact of a psychological chain of consequences has been
absolutely confirmed, although Freud’s original conception, that real
traumatic scenes were always to be found, has not been.


                   Theory of Sexual Trauma Abandoned


Freud himself abandoned his first presentation of the shock-theory after
further and more thorough investigation. He could no longer retain his
original view as to the reality of the sexual shock. Excessive
sexuality, sexual abuse of children, or very early sexual activity in
childhood, were later on seen to be of secondary importance. You will
perhaps be inclined to share the suspicion of the critics that the
results derived from analytic researches were based on suggestion. There
might be some justification for this view if these assertions had been
published broadcast by some charlatan or ill-qualified person. But
anyone who has carefully read Freud’s works, and has himself similarly
sought to penetrate into the psychology of his patients, will know that
it is unjust to attribute to an intellect like Freud’s the crude
mistakes of a journeyman. Such suggestions only redound to the discredit
of those who make them. Ever since then patients have been examined by
every possible means from which suggestion could be absolutely excluded.
And still the associations described by Freud have been proved to be
true in principle. We are thus obliged in the first place to regard many
of these shocks of early childhood as phantoms, while other traumata
have objective reality. With this knowledge, at first somewhat
confusing, the etiological importance of the sexual trauma in childhood
declines, as it seems now quite irrelevant whether the trauma really
took place or not. Experience teaches us that phantasy can be, so to
speak, of the same traumatic value as real shock. In the face of such
facts, every physician who treats hysteria will recall cases where the
neurosis has indeed been provoked by violent traumatic impressions. This
observation is only in apparent contradiction with our knowledge,
already referred to, of the unreality of traumatic events in childhood.
We know perfectly well that many persons suffer shocks in childhood or
in adult life who nevertheless get no neurosis. Therefore the trauma
has, ceteris paribus, no absolute etiological importance, but owes its
efficacy to the nature of the soil upon which it falls.


                   The Predisposition for the Trauma


No neurosis will grow on an unprepared soil where no germ of neurosis is
already existing; the trauma will pass by without leaving any permanent
and effective mark. From this simple consideration it is pretty clear
that, to make it really effective, the patient must meet the shock with
a certain internal predisposition. This internal predisposition is not
to be understood as meaning that totally obscure hereditary
predisposition of which we know so little, but as a psychological
development which reaches its apogee and its manifestation at the
moment, and even through, the trauma.

I will show you first of all by a concrete case the nature of the trauma
and its psychological predisposition. A young lady suffered from severe
hysteria after a sudden fright. She had been attending a social
gathering that evening and was on her way home at midnight, accompanied
by several acquaintances, when a carriage came behind her at full speed.
Everyone else drew aside, but she, paralyzed by fright, remained in the
middle of the street and ran just in front of the horses. The coachman
cracked his whip, cursed and swore without any result. She ran down the
whole length of the street, which led to a bridge. There her strength
failed her, and to escape the horses’ feet she thought, in her extreme
despair, of jumping into the water, but was prevented in time by
passers-by. This very same lady happened to be present a little later on
that bloody day, the 22d of January, in St. Petersburg, when a street
was cleared by soldiers’ volleys. Right and left of her she saw people
dying or falling down badly wounded. Remaining perfectly calm and
clear-minded, she caught sight of a gate that gave her escape into
another street.

These terrible moments did not agitate her, either at the time, or later
on. Whence it must follow that the intensity of the trauma is of small
pathogenic importance: the special conditions form the essential
factors. Here, then, we have the key by which we are able to unlock at
least one of the anterooms to the understanding of predisposition. We
must next ask what were the special circumstances in this
carriage-scene. The terror and apprehension began as soon as the lady
heard the horses’ foot-steps. It seemed to her for a moment as if these
betokened some terrible fate, portending her death or something
dreadful. Then she lost consciousness. The real causation is somehow
connected with the horses. The predisposition of the patient, who acts
thus wildly at such a commonplace occurence, could perhaps be found in
the fact that horses had a special significance for her. It might
suffice, for instance, if she had been once concerned in some dangerous
accident with horses. This assumption does hold good here. When she was
seven years old, she was once out on a carriage-drive with the coachman;
the horses shied and approached the steep river-bank at full speed. The
coachman jumped off his seat, and shouted to her to do the same, which
she was barely able to do, as she was frightened to death. Still, she
sprang down at the right moment, whilst the horses and carriage were
dashed down below.

It is unnecessary to prove that such an event must leave a lasting
impression behind. But still it does not offer any explanation for the
exaggerated reaction to an inadequate stimulus. Up till now we only know
that this later symptom had its prologue in childhood, but the
pathological side remains obscure. To solve this enigma we require other
experiences. The amnesia which I will set forth fully later on shows
clearly the disproportion between the so-called shock and the part
played by phantasy. In this case phantasy must predominate to an
extraordinary extent to provoke such an effect. The shock in itself was
too insignificant. We are at first inclined to explain this incident by
the shock that took place in childhood, but it seems to me with little
success. It is difficult to understand why the effect of this infantile
trauma had remained latent so long, and why it only now came to the
surface. The patient must surely have had opportunities enough during
her lifetime of getting out of the way of a carriage going full speed.
The reminiscence of the danger to her life seems to be quite
insufficiently effective: the real danger in which she was at that one
moment in St. Petersburg did not produce the slightest trace of
neurosis, despite her being predisposed by an impressive event in her
childhood. The whole of this traumatic event still lacks explanation;
from the point of view of the shock-theory we are hopelessly in the
dark.

You must excuse me if I return so persistently to the shock-theory. I
consider this necessary, as now-a-days many people, even those who
regard us seriously, still keep to this standpoint. Thus the opponents
to psychoanalysis and those who never read psychoanalytic articles, or
do so quite superficially, get the impression that in psychoanalysis the
old shock-theory is still in force.

The question arises: what are we to understand by this predisposition,
through which an insignificant event produces such a pathological
effect? This is the question of chief significance, and we shall find
that the same question plays an important rôle in the theory of
neurosis, for we have to understand why apparently irrelevant events of
the past are still producing such effects that they are able to
interfere in an impish and capricious way with the normal reactions of
actual life.


                    The Sexual Element in the Trauma


The early school of psychoanalysis, and its later disciples, did all
they could to find the origin of later effects in the special kind of
early traumatic events. Freud’s research penetrated most deeply. He was
the first, and it was he alone, who discovered that a certain sexual
element was connected with the shock. It is just this sexual element
which, speaking generally, we may consider as unconscious, and it is to
this that the traumatic effect is generally due. The unconsciousness of
sexuality in childhood seems to throw a light upon the problem of the
persistent constellation of the primary traumatic event. The true
emotional meaning of the accident was all along hidden from the patient,
so that in consciousness this emotion was never brought into play, the
emotion never wore itself out, it was never used up. We might perhaps
explain the effect in the following way: this persistent constellation
was a kind of “suggestion à échéance,” for it is unconscious and the
action occurs only at the stipulated moment.

It is hardly necessary to give detailed examples to prove that the true
nature of sexual manifestations during infancy is not understood.
Physicians know, for instance, how often a manifest masturbation
persisting up to adult life, especially in women, is not understood as
such. It is, therefore, easy to realize that to a child the true nature
of certain actions would be far less conscious. And that is the reason
why the real meaning of these events, even in adult life, is still
hidden from our consciousness. In some cases, even, the traumatic events
are themselves forgotten, either because their sexual meaning is quite
unknown to the patient, or because their sexual character is
inacceptable, being too painful. It is what we call “repressed.”

As we have already mentioned, Freud’s observation, that the admixture of
a sexual element with the shock is essential for any pathological
effect, leads on to the theory of the _infantile sexual trauma_.

This hypothesis may be thus expressed: the pathogenic event is a sexual
one. This conception forced its way with difficulty. The general opinion
that children have no sexuality in early life made such an etiology
inadmissible, and at first prevented its acceptance.


                     The Infantile Sexual Phantasy


The change in the shock-theory already referred to, namely, that in
general the shock is not even real, but is essentially a phantasy, did
not make things better. On the contrary, still worse, since we are
forced to the conclusion that we find in the infantile phantasy at least
one positive sexual manifestation. It is no longer some brutal
accidental impression from the outside, but a positive sexual
manifestation created by the child itself, and this very often with
unmistakable clearness. Even real traumatic events of an outspoken
sexual type do not always happen to a child quite _without its
coöperation_, but are not infrequently apparently _prepared and brought
about by the child itself_. Abraham stated this, proving his statement
with evidence of the greatest interest, and this, in connection with
many other experiences of the same kind, makes it very probable that
even really sexual scenes are frequently called forth and supported by
the peculiar psychological state of the child’s mind. Perfectly
independently from psychoanalytic investigation, medical criminology has
discovered striking parallels to this psychoanalytic statement.

Footnote 1:

  “Selected Papers on Hysteria and Other Psychoneuroses,” by Prof.
  Sigmund Freud. Nervous and Mental Disease Monograph Series, No. 4.

Footnote 2:

  Monograph No. 4, p. 14.

Footnote 3:

  _Ibid._




                               CHAPTER II
                        The Infantile Sexuality


The precocious manifestations of sexual phantasy as cause of the shock
now seemed to be the source of neurosis. This, logically, attributed to
children a far more developed sexuality than had been hitherto admitted.
Many cases of precocious sexuality had been recorded in literature long
before the time of psychoanalysis. For instance, a girl of two years old
with normal menstruation, or cases of boys of three and four and five
years of age having normal erections, and so far ready for cohabitation.
These were, however, curiosities. Great astonishment was caused when
Freud began to attribute to the child, not only ordinary sexuality, but
even polymorphic perverse sexuality; all this based upon the most
exhaustive investigation. People inclined much too lightly to the
superficial view, that all this was merely suggested to the patients,
and was a highly disputable artificial product. Hence Freud’s[4] “Three
Contributions to the Sexual Theory” not only provoked opposition, but
even violent indignation. It is surely unnecessary to insist upon the
fact that science is not furthered by indignation, and that arguments of
moral resentment may perhaps please the moralist—that is his
business—but not a scientific man, for whom truth must be the guide, and
not moral indignation. If matters are really as Freud describes them,
all indignation is absurd; if they are not so, again indignation will
avail nothing. The conclusion as to what is the truth can only be
arrived at on the field of observation and research, and nowhere else.
The opponents of psychoanalysis with certain honorable exceptions,
display rather ludicrously a somewhat pitifully inadequate realization
of the situation. Although the psychoanalytic school could unfortunately
learn nothing from their critics, as the criticism took no notice of its
investigations, and although it could not get any useful hints, because
the psychoanalytic method of investigation was, and still is unknown to
these critics, it remains a serious duty for our school to explain
thoroughly the contrast between the existing conceptions. It is not our
endeavor to put forward a paradoxical theory contradicting all existing
theories, but rather to introduce a certain category of new observations
into science. Therefore we regard it as a duty to do whatever we can to
promote agreement. It is true, we must renounce all hope of obtaining
the approval of those who blindly oppose us, but we do hope to come to
an understanding with scientific men. This will be my endeavor now in
attempting to sketch the further intellectual development of the
psychoanalytic conception, so far as the so-called sexual theory of the
neuroses is concerned.


                  Objections to the Sexual Hypothesis


As I said, the finding of precocious sexual phantasies, which seemed the
source of the neurosis, forced Freud to the view of a highly developed
sexuality in infancy. As you know, the reality of this observation has
been contested by many, who maintain that crude error, that
narrow-minded delusion, misled Freud and his whole school, alike in
Europe and in America, so that the Freudians saw things that never
existed. They regarded them as people in the grip of an intellectual
epidemic. I have to admit that I possess no way of defending myself
against criticism of this kind. The only thing I can do is to refer to
my own work, asking thoughtful persons if they discover there any clear
indications of madness. Moreover, I must maintain that science has no
right to start with the idea that certain facts do not exist. At the
most one can say: “This seems very improbable—we want still more proofs
and more research.” This is also our reply to the objection: “It is
impossible to discover anything trustworthy by the psychoanalytic
method, as this method is practically absurd.” No one believed in
Galileo’s telescope, and Columbus discovered America on a false
hypothesis. The psychoanalytic method may be full of errors, but this
should not prevent its use. Many chronological and medical observations
have been made with inadequate instruments. We must regard the
objections to the method as pretexts until our opponents come to grip
with the facts. It is there a decision must be reached—not by wordy
warfare.

Our opponents also call hysteria a psychogenic disease. We believe that
we have discovered the etiological determinants of this disease and we
present, without fear, the results of our investigation to open
criticism. Whoever cannot accept our results should publish his own
analyses of cases. So far as I know, that has never been done, at least
not in European literature. Under these circumstances, critics have no
right to deny our conclusions a priori. Our opponents have likewise
cases of hysteria, and those cases are surely as psychogenic as our own.
There is nothing to prevent their pointing out the psychological
determinants. The method is not the real question. Our opponents content
themselves with disputing and reviling our researches, but they do not
point out any better way.

Many other critics are more careful and more just, and do admit that we
have made many valuable observations, and that the associations of ideas
given by the psychoanalytic method will very probably stand, but they
maintain that our point of view is wrong. The alleged sexual phantasies
of childhood, with which we are here chiefly concerned, must not be
taken, they say, as real sexual functions, being obviously something
quite different, since at the approach of puberty the characteristic
peculiarities of sexuality are acquired.

This objection, being calmly and reasonably made, deserves to be taken
seriously. Such objections must also have occurred to every one who has
taken up analytic work, and there is reason enough for deep reflection.


                      The Conception of Sexuality


The first difficulty arises with the conception of sexuality. If we
take sexuality as meaning the fully-developed function, we must
confine this phenomenon to maturity, and then, of course, we have no
right to speak of sexuality in childhood. If we so limit our
conception, then we are confronted again with new and much greater
difficulties. The question arises, how then must we denominate all
those correlated biological phenomena pertaining to the sexual
functions sensu strictiori, as, for instance, pregnancy, childbirth,
natural selection, protection of the offspring, etc. It seems to me
that all this belongs to the conception of sexuality as well, although
a very distinguished colleague did once say, “Childbirth is not a
sexual act.” But if these things do pertain to this concept of
sexuality, then there must also belong innumerable psychological
phenomena. For we know that an incredible number of the pure
psychological functions are connected with this sphere. I shall only
mention the extraordinary importance of phantasy in the preparation
for the sexual function. Thus we arrive rather at a biological
conception of sexuality, which includes both a series of psychological
phenomena as well as a series of physiological functions. If we might
be allowed to make use of an old but practical classification, we
might identify sexuality with the so-called instinct of the
preservation of the species, as opposed in some way to the instinct of
self-preservation.

Looking at sexuality from this point of view, we shall not be astonished
to find that the root of the instinct of race-preservation, so
extraordinarily important in nature, goes much deeper than the limited
conception of sexuality would ever allow. Only the more or less grown-up
cat actually catches mice, but the kitten plays at least as if it were
catching mice. The young dog’s playful indications of attempts at
cohabitation begin long before puberty. We have a right to suppose that
mankind is no exception to this rule, although we do not notice similar
things on the surface in our well brought-up children. Investigation of
the children of the lower classes proves that they are no exceptions to
the biological rule. It is of course infinitely more probable that this
most important instinct, that of the preservation of the race, is
already nascent in the earliest childhood, than that it falls at one
swoop from heaven, full-fledged, at the age of puberty. The sexual
organs also develop long before the slightest sign of their future
function can be noticed. Where the psychoanalytic school speaks of
sexuality, this wider conception of its function must be linked to it,
and we do not mean simply that physical sensation and function generally
designated by the term sexual. It might be said that, in order to avoid
any misunderstanding on this point, the term sexuality should not be
given to these preparatory phenomena in childhood. This demand is surely
not justified, since the anatomical nomenclature is taken from the
fully-developed system, and special names are not generally given to
more or less rudimentary formations.

After all, the objections to the terminology do not spring so much from
objective arguments, as from those tendencies which lie at the base of
moral indignation. But then no objection can be made to the
sex-terminology of Freud, as he rightly gives to the whole sexual
development the general name of sexuality. But certain conclusions have
been drawn which, so far as I can see, cannot be maintained.


                    The “Sexuality” of the Suckling


When we examine how far back in childhood the first traces of sexuality
reach, we have to admit implicitly that sexuality already exists ab ovo,
but only becomes manifest a long time after intrauterine life. Freud is
inclined to see in the function of taking the mother’s breast already a
kind of sexuality. Freud was bitterly reproached for this view, but it
must be admitted that it is very ingenious, if we follow his hypothesis,
that the instinct of the preservation of the race has existed separately
from the instinct of self-preservation ab ovo and has undergone a
separate development. This way of thinking is not, however, a biological
one. It is not possible to separate the two ways of manifestation of the
hypothetical vital process, and to credit each with a different order of
development. If we limit ourselves to judging by what we can actually
observe, we must reckon with the fact that everywhere in nature we see
that the vital processes in an individual consist for a considerable
space of time in the functions of nutrition and growth only. We see this
very clearly in many animals; for instance, in butterflies, which as
caterpillars pass an asexual existence of nutrition and growth. To this
stage of life we may allot both the intrauterine life and the
extrauterine time of suckling in man. This time is marked by the absence
of all sexual function; hence to speak of manifest sexuality in the
suckling would be a contradictio in adjecto.

The most we can do is to ask if, among the life-functions of the
suckling, there are any that have not the character of nutrition, or of
growth, and hence could be termed sexual. Freud points out the
unmistakable emotion and satisfaction of the child while suckling, and
compares this process with that of the sexual act. This similarity leads
him to assume the sexual quality in the act of suckling. This conclusion
is only admissible if it can be proved that the tension of the need, and
its gratification by a release, is a sexual process. That the act of
suckling has this emotional mechanism proves, however, just the
contrary. Therefore we can only say this emotional mechanism is found
both in nutrition and in the sexual function. If Freud by analogy
deduces the sexual quality of sucking from this emotional mechanism,
then his biological empiricism would also justify the terminology
qualifying the sexual act as a function of nutrition. This is
unjustifiably exceeding the bounds in either case. It is evident that
the act of sucking cannot be qualified as sexual.

We are aware, however, of functions in the suckling stage which have
apparently nothing to do with the function of nutrition, such as sucking
the finger, and its many variations. This is perhaps the place to
discuss whether these things belong to the sexual sphere. These acts do
not subserve nutrition, but produce pleasure. Of that there is no doubt,
but nevertheless it is disputable whether this pleasure which comes by
sucking should be called by analogy a sexual satisfaction. It might be
called equally pleasure by nutrition. This latter qualification has even
the further justification that the form and kind of pleasure belong
entirely to the function of nutrition. The hand which is used for
sucking finds in this way preparation for future use in feeding one’s
self. Under these circumstances nobody will be inclined by a petitio
principii to characterize the first manifestation of human life as
sexual. The statement which we make that the act of sucking is attended
by a feeling of satisfaction leaves us in doubt whether the sucking does
contain anything else but the character of nutrition. We notice that the
so-called bad habits shown by a child as it grows up are closely linked
with early infantile sucking, such for instance as putting the finger in
the mouth, biting the nails, picking the nose, ears, etc. We see, too,
how closely these habits are connected with later masturbation. By
analogy, the conclusion that these infantile habits are the first step
to onanism, or to actions similar to onanism, and are therefore of a
well-marked sexual character cannot be denied: it is perfectly
justified. I have seen many cases in which a correlation existed between
these childish habits and later masturbation. If this masturbation takes
place in later childhood, before puberty, it is nothing but an infantile
bad habit. From the fact of the correlation between masturbation and the
other childish bad habits, we conclude that these habits have a sexual
character, in so far as they are used to obtain physical satisfaction
from the child’s own body.

This new standpoint is comprehensible and perhaps necessary. It is only
a few steps from this point of view to regarding the infant’s act of
sucking as of a sexual character. As you know, Freud took the few steps,
but you have just heard me reject them. We have come to a difficulty
which is very hard to solve. It would be relatively easy if we could
accept two instincts side by side, each an entity in itself. Then the
act of sucking the breast would be both an action of nutrition and a
sexual act. This seems to be Freud’s conception. We find in adults the
two instincts separated, yet existing side by side, or rather we find
that there are two manifestations, in hunger, and in the sexual
instinct. But at the sucking age, we find only the function of
nutrition, rewarded by both pleasure and satisfaction. Its sexual
character can only be argued by a petitio principii, for the facts show
that the act of sucking is the first to give pleasure, not the sexual
function. Obtaining pleasure is by no means identical with sexuality. We
deceive ourselves if we think that in the suckling both instincts exist
side by side, for then we project into the psyche of the child the facts
taken from the psychology of adults. The existence of the two instincts
side by side does not occur in suckling, for one of these instincts has
no existence as yet, or, if existing, is quite rudimentary. If we are to
regard the striving for pleasure as something sexual, we might as well
say paradoxically that hunger is a sexual striving, for this instinct
seeks pleasure by satisfaction. If this were true, we should have to
give our opponents permission to apply the terminology of hunger to
sexuality. It would facilitate matters, were it possible to maintain
that both instincts existed side by side, but it contradicts the
observed facts and would lead to untenable consequences.

Before I try to resolve this opposition, I must first say something more
about Freud’s sexual theory, and its transformations.


             The Polymorphic Perverse Sexuality of Infancy


We have already reached the conclusion, setting out from the idea of the
shock being apparently due to sexual phantasies, that the child must
have, in contradiction to the views hitherto prevailing, a nearly fully
formed sexuality, and even a _polymorphic perverse sexuality_. Its
sexuality does not seem concentrated on the genital functions or on the
other sex, but is occupied with its own body; whence it is said to be
auto-erotic. If its sexual instinct is directed to another person, no
distinction, or but the very slightest, is made as to sex. It can,
therefore, be very easily homo-sexual. In place of non-existing local
sexual function there exists a series of so-called bad habits, which
from this standpoint look like a series of perversities, since they have
the closest analogy with the later perversities. In consequence of this
way of regarding the subject, sexuality, whose nature is ordinarily
regarded as a unit, becomes decomposed into a multiplicity of isolated
striving forces. Freud then arrived at the conception of the so-called
“erogenous zones,” by which he understood mouth, skin, anus, etc. (It
is, of course, a universal tacit presumption that sexuality has its
origin in the sexual organs.)

The term “erogenous zone” reminds us of “spasmo-genic zones,” and the
underlying image is at all events the same; just as the spasmo-genic
zone is the place whence the spasm arises, so the erogenous zone is the
place whence arises an affluent to sexuality. Based upon the model of
the genital organs as the anatomical origin of sexuality, the erogenous
zones must be conceived as being so many genitals out of which the
streams of sexuality flow together. This is the condition of the
_polymorphic perverse sexuality of childhood_. The expression “perverse”
seems to be justified by the close analogy with the later perversities
which present, so to speak, but a new edition of certain early infantile
perverse habits. They are very often connected with one or other of the
different erogenous zones, and are the cause of those exchanges in sex,
which are so characteristic for childhood.

According to this view, the later normal and monomorphic sexuality is
built up out of several components. The first division is into homo- and
hetero-sexual components, to which is linked an auto-erotic component,
as also there are components of the different erogenous zones. This
conception can be compared with the position of physics before Robert
Mayer, when only isolated forces, having elementary qualities, were
recognized, whose interchanges were little understood. The law of the
conservation of energy brought order into the inter-relationship of the
forces, at the same time abolishing the conception of those forces as
absolute elements, but regarding them as interchangeable manifestations
of one and the same energy.


            The Sexual Components as Energic Manifestations


Conceptions of great importance do not arise only in one brain, but are
floating in the air and dip here and there, appearing even under other
forms, and in other regions, where it is often very difficult to
recognize the common fundamental idea. Thus it happened with the
splitting up of sexuality into the polymorphic perverse sexuality of
childhood.

Experience forces us to accept a constant exchange of isolated
components as we notice more and more that, for instance, perversities
exist at the expense of normal sexuality, or that the increase of
certain kinds of sex-manifestations causes corresponding deficiencies of
another kind. To make the matter clearer, let me give you an instance: A
young man had a homo-sexual phase lasting for some years, during which
time women had no interest for him. This abnormal condition changed
gradually toward his twentieth year and his erotic interest became more
and more normal. He began to take great interest in girls, and soon the
last traces of his homo-sexuality were conquered. This condition lasted
several years, and he had some successful love-affairs. Then he wished
to get married; he had here to suffer a great disappointment, as the
girl to whom he proposed refused him. During the ensuing phase he
absolutely abandoned the idea of marriage. After that he experienced a
dislike of all women, and one day he discovered that he was again
perfectly homo-sexual, that is, young men had an unusually irritating
influence upon him. To regard sexuality as composed of a fixed
hetero-sexual component, and a like homo-sexual element, will never
suffice to explain this case, for the conception of the existence of
fixed components excludes any kind of transformation.

To understand the case, we have to admit a great mobility of the sexual
components, which even goes so far that one of the components can
practically disappear completely, whilst the other comes to the front.
If only substitution took place, if for instance the homo-sexual
component entered the unconscious, leaving the field of consciousness to
the hetero-sexual component, modern scientific knowledge would lead us
to conclude that equivalent effects arose from the unconscious sphere.
Those effects would have to be conceived as resistances against the
activity of the hetero-sexual component, as a repugnance towards women.

Experience tells us nothing about this. There have been some small
traces of influences of this kind, but of such slight intensity that
they cannot be compared with the intensity of the former homo-sexual
component. On the conception that has been outlined, it is also
incomprehensible how this homo-sexual component, regarded as so firmly
fixed, can ever disappear without leaving active traces. To explain
things, the process of development is called in, forgetting that this is
only a word and explains nothing. You see, therefore, the urgent
necessity of an adequate explanation of such a change of scene. For this
we must have a dynamic hypothesis. Such commutations are only
conceivable as dynamic or energic processes. I cannot conceive how
manifestations of functions can disappear if I do not accept a change in
the relation of one force to another. Freud’s theory did have regard to
this necessity in the conception of components. The presumption of
isolated functions existing side by side began to be somewhat weakened,
more in practice than theoretically. It was replaced by an energic
conception. The term chosen for this conception is “libido.”

Footnote 4:

  No. 7 of this Monograph Series.




                              CHAPTER III
                        The Conception of Libido


Freud had already introduced the idea of libido in his[5] “Three
Contributions to the Sexual Theory” in the following words:

“In biology, the fact that both mankind and animals have a sexual want
is expressed by the conception of the sexual desire. This is done by
analogy with the want of nourishment, so-called hunger. Popular speech
has no corresponding characterization for the word ‘hunger,’ and so
science uses the word ‘libido.’”

In Freud’s definition, the term “libido” appears as exclusively a sexual
desire. “Libido” as a medical term is certainly used for sexual desire,
and especially for sexual lust. But the classical definition of this
word as found in Cicero, Sallust, and others, was not so exclusive. The
word is there used in a more general sense for every passionate desire.
I only just mention this definition here, as further on it plays an
important part in our considerations, and as it is important to know
that the term “libido” has really a much wider meaning than is
associated with it through medical language.

The idea of libido (while maintaining its sexual meaning in the author’s
sense as long as possible) offers us the dynamic value which we are
seeking in order to explain the shifting of the psychological scenery.
With this conception it is much simpler to formulate the phenomena in
question, instead of by the incomprehensible substitution of the homo-
by the hetero-sexual component. We may say now that the libido has
gradually withdrawn from its homo-sexual manifestation and is
transferred in the same measure into a hetero-sexual manifestation. Thus
the homo-sexual component practically disappears. It remains only an
empty possibility, signifying nothing in itself. Its very existence,
therefore, is rightly denied by the laity, just as we doubt the
possibility that any man selected at random would turn out to be a
murderer. By the use of this conception of libido many relations between
the isolated sexual functions are now easily explicable.

The early idea of the multiplicity of sexual components must be given
up: it savors too much of the ancient philosophical notion of the
faculties of the mind. Its place is taken by libido which is capable of
manifold applications. The earlier components only represent
possibilities of activities. With this conception of libido, the
original idea of a divided sexuality with different roots is replaced by
a dynamic unity, without which the formerly important components remain
but empty possibilities of activities. This development in our
conception is of great importance. We have here the same process which
Robert Mayer introduced into dynamics. Just as the conception of the
conservation of energy removed their character as elements from the
forces, imparting to them the character of a manifestation of energy, so
the libido theory similarly removes from the sexual components the idea
of the mental “faculties” as elements (“Seelen Vermögen”), and ascribes
to them merely phenomenal value. This conception represents the
impression of reality far more than the theory of components. With a
libido-theory we can easily explain the case of the young man. The
disappointment he met with, just at the time he had definitely decided
on a hetero-sexual life, drove his libido again from the hetero-sexual
manifestation into a homo-sexual form, thus calling forth his entire
homo-sexuality.


                      The Energic Theory of Libido


I must point out here that the analogy with the law of the conservation
of energy is very close. In both cases the question arises when an
effect of energy disappears, where is this energy meanwhile, and where
will it reemerge? Applying this point of view as a heuristic principle
to the psychology of human conduct, we shall make some astonishing
discoveries. Then we shall see how the most heterogeneous phases of
individual psychological development are connected in an energic
relationship. Every time we see a person who is splenetic or has a
morbid conviction, or some exaggerated mental attitude, we know here is
too much libido, and the excess must have been taken away from somewhere
else where there is too little. From this standpoint, psychoanalysis is
that method which discovers those places or functions where there is too
little or too much libido, and restores the just proportions. Thus the
symptoms of a neurosis must be considered as exaggerated and
correspondingly disturbed functional manifestations overflowing with
libido. The energy which has been used for this purpose has been taken
away from somewhere else, and it is the task of the psychoanalyst, to
restore it whence it was taken, or to bestow it where it was never
before given. Those complexes of symptoms which are mainly characterized
by lack of libido, for instance, the so-called apathetic conditions,
force us to reverse the question. Here we have to ask, where did the
libido go? The patient gives us the impression of having no libido, and
there are occasionally physicians who believe exactly what the patients
tell them. Such physicians have a primitive way of thinking, like the
savage who believes, when he sees an eclipse of the sun, that the sun
has been swallowed up and put to death. But the sun is only hidden, and
so it is with these patients. Although the libido is there, it is not
get-at-able, and is inaccessible to the patient himself. Superficially,
we have here a lack of libido. It is the task of psychoanalysis to
search for that hidden place where the libido dwells, and where it is as
a rule inaccessible to the patient. The hidden place is the
non-conscious, which may also be called the unconscious, without
ascribing to it any mysterious significance.


                 The Conception of Unconscious Phantasy


Psychoanalytic experience has taught us that there are non-conscious
systems which, by analogy with conscious phantasies, can be described as
phantasy-systems of the unconscious. In cases of neurotic apathy these
phantasy systems of the unconscious are the objects of the libido. We
know well that, when we speak of unconscious phantasy systems, we only
speak figuratively. We do not mean more by this than that we accept as
an indispensable postulate the conception of psychic entities existing
outside consciousness. Experience teaches us, we might say daily, that
there are unconscious psychic processes which influence the disposition
of the libido in a perceptible way. Those cases, known to every
psychiatrist in which complicated symptoms of delusions emerge with
relative great suddenness, show clearly that there must be unconscious
psychic development and preparation, for we cannot regard them as having
been just suddenly formed when they entered consciousness.


                         The Sexual Terminology


I feel myself justified in making this digression concerning the
unconscious. I have done it to point out that, with regard to shifting
of the manifestations of the libido, we have to deal not only with the
conscious, but also with another factor, the unconscious, whither the
libido sometimes disappears. We have not yet followed up the discussion
of the further consequences which result from the adoption of the
libido-theory.

Freud has taught us, and we see it in the daily practice of
psychoanalysis, that in earlier childhood, instead of the normal later
sexuality, we find many tendencies which in later life are called
perversions. We have to admit that Freud has the right to give to these
tendencies a sexual terminology. Through the introduction of the
conception of the libido, we see that in adults those elementary
components which seemed to be the origin and the source of normal
sexuality, lose their importance, and are reduced to mere
potentialities. The effective power, their life force, is to be found in
the libido. Without libido these components mean nothing. We saw that
Freud gives to the conception of libido an undoubted sexual definition,
somewhat in the sense of sexual desire. The general view is, that libido
in this sense only comes into being at the age of puberty. How are we
then to explain the fact that in Freud’s view a child has a
polymorphic-perverse sexuality, and that therefore, in children, the
libido brings into action not only one, but several possibilities? If
the libido, in Freud’s sense, begins its existence at puberty, it could
not be held accountable for earlier infantile perversions. In that case,
we should have to regard these infantile perversions as “faculties of
the mind,” in the sense of the theory of components. Apart from the
hopeless theoretical confusion which would thus arise, we must not
multiply explanatory principles in accordance with the philosophical
axiom: “principia praeter necessitatem non sunt multiplicanda.”

There is no other way but to agree that before and after puberty it is
the same libido. Hence, the perversities of childhood have arisen
exactly in the same way as those of adults. Common sense will object to
this, as obviously the sexual needs of children cannot possibly be the
same as those of adults. We might admit, with Freud, that the libido
before and after puberty is the same, but is different in its intensity.
Instead of the intense post-pubertal sexual desire, there would be first
a slight sexual desire in childhood, with diminishing intensity until,
as we reach back to the first year, it is but a trace. We might admit
that we are biologically in agreement with this formulation. It would
then have to be also agreed that everything that falls into the region
of this enlarged conception of sexuality is already pre-existing but in
miniature; for instance, all those emotional manifestations of
psycho-sexuality: desire for affection, jealousy, and many others, and
by no means least, the neuroses of childhood.

It must, however, be admitted that these emotional manifestations of
childhood by no means make the impression of being in miniature; their
intensity can rival that of an affect among adults. Nor must it be
forgotten that experience has shown that perverse manifestations of
sexuality in childhood are often more glaring, and indeed seem to have a
greater development, than in adults. If an adult under similar
conditions had this apparently excessive form of sexuality, which is
practically normal in children, we could rightly expect a total absence
of normal sexuality, and of many other important biological adaptations.
An adult is rightly called perverse when his libido is not used for
normal functions, and the same could be said of a child: it is
polymorphous perverse since it does not know normal sexual functions.

These considerations suggest the idea that perhaps the amount of libido
is always the same, and that no increase first occur at puberty. This
somewhat audacious conception accords with the example of the law of the
conservation of energy, according to which the quantity of energy
remains always the same. It is possible that the summit of maturity is
reached when the infantile diffuse applications of libido discharge
themselves into the one channel of definite sexuality, and thus lose
themselves therein. For the moment we must content ourselves with these
suggestions, for we must next pay attention to one point of criticism
concerning the quality of the infantile libido.

Many critics do not admit that the infantile libido is simply less
intense or is essentially of the same kind as the libido of adults. The
emotions among adults are correlated with the genital functions. This is
not the case in children, or it is only so in miniature, or
exceptionally, and this gives rise to an important distinction, which
must not be undervalued.

I believe such an objection is justified. There is really a considerable
difference between immature and fully developed functions, as there is a
difference between play and reality, between shooting with blank and
with loaded cartridges. That the childish libido has the harmlessness
demanded by common sense cannot be contested. But of course none can
deny that blank shooting is shooting. We must get accustomed to the idea
that sexuality really exists, even before puberty, right back in early
childhood, and that we have no right to pretend that manifestations of
this immature sexuality are not sexual. This does not indeed refute the
objection, which, while recognizing the existence of infantile sexuality
in the form already described, yet denies Freud’s claim to regard as
sexual early infantile manifestations such as sucking. We have mentioned
already the motives which induced Freud to enlarge the sexual
terminology in such a way. We mentioned, too, how this very act of
sucking, for instance, could be conceived from the standpoint of
pleasure in the function of nutrition, and that, on biological grounds,
there was more justification for this derivation than for Freud’s view.
It might be objected that these and similar activities of the oral zones
are found in later life in an undoubted sexual use. This only means that
these activities can in later life be used for sexual purposes, but that
does not tell us anything concerning the primitive sexual nature of
these forms. I must, therefore, admit that I find no ground for
regarding the activities of the suckling, which provoke pleasure and
satisfaction, from the standpoint of sexuality. Indeed there are many
objections against this conception. It seems to me, in so far as I am
capable of judging these difficult problems, that from the standpoint of
sexuality it is necessary to divide human life into three phases.


                        The Three Phases of Life


The first phase embraces the first years of life. I call this part of
life the pre-sexual stage. These years correspond to the
caterpillar-stage of butterflies, and are characterized almost
exclusively by the functions of nutrition and growth.

The second phase embraces the later years of childhood up to puberty,
and might be called the pre-pubertal stage.

The third phase is that of riper years, proceeding only from puberty
onwards, and could be called the time of maturity.

You cannot have failed to notice that we become conscious of the
greatest difficulty when we arrive at the question at what age we must
put the limit of the pre-sexual stage. I am ready to confess my
uncertainty with regard to this problem. If I survey the
psychoanalytical experiences with children, as yet insufficiently
numerous, at the same time keeping in mind the observations made by
Freud, it seems to me that the limit of this phase lies between the
third and fifth years. This, of course, with due consideration for the
greatest individual diversities. From various aspects this is an
important age. The child has emancipated itself already from the
helplessness of the baby, and a series of important psychological
functions have acquired a firm hold. From this period on, the obscurity
of the early infantile “amnesia,” or the _discontinuity of the early
infantile consciousness_, begins to clear up through the _sporadic
continuity of memory_. It seems as if, at this age, a considerable step
had been made towards emancipation and the formation of a new and
independent personality. As far as we know, the first signs of interest
and activity which may fairly be called sexual fall into this period,
although these sexual indications have still the infantile
characteristics of harmlessness and naiveté. I think I have sufficiently
demonstrated why a sexual terminology cannot be given to the pre-sexual
stage, and so we may now consider the other problems from the standpoint
we have just reached. You will remember that we dropped the problem of
the libido in childhood, because it seemed impossible to arrive at any
clearness in that way. But now we are obliged to take up the question
again, if only to see whether the energic conception harmonizes with the
principles just advanced. We saw, following Freud’s conception, that the
altered manifestations of the infantile sexuality, if compared with
those of maturity, are to be explained by the diminution of sexuality in
childhood.


           The Sexual Definition of Libido Must be Abandoned


The intensity of the libido is said to be diminished relatively to the
early age. But we advanced just now several considerations to show why
it seems doubtful if we can regard the vital functions of a child,
sexuality excepted, as of less intensity than those of adults. We can
really say that, sexuality excepted, the emotional phenomena, and, if
nervous symptoms are present, then these likewise are quite as intense
as those of adults. On the energic conception of the libido all these
things are but manifestations of the libido. But it becomes rather
difficult to conceive that the intensity of the libido can ever
constitute the difference between a mature and an immature sexuality.
The explanation of this difference seems rather to postulate a change in
the localization of the libido (if the expression be allowed). In
contradistinction to the medical definition the libido in children is
occupied far more with certain side-functions of a mental and
physiological nature than with local sexual functions. One is here
already tempted to remove from the term libido the predicate “sexualis,”
and thus to have done with the sexual definition of the term given in
Freud’s “Three Contributions.” This necessity becomes imperative, when
we put it in the form of a question: The child in the first years of its
life is intensely living—suffering and enjoying—the question is, whether
his striving, his suffering, his enjoyment are by reason of his libido
sexualis? Freud has pronounced himself in favor of this supposition.
There is no need to repeat the reasons through which I am compelled to
accept the pre-sexual stage. The larva stage possesses a libido of
nutrition, if I may so express it, but not yet the libido sexualis. It
is thus we must put it, if we wish to keep the energic conception which
the libido theory offers us. I think there is nothing for it but to
abandon the sexual definition of libido, or we shall lose what there is
valuable in the libido theory, that is, the energic conception. For a
long time past the desire to extend the meaning of libido, and to remove
it from its narrow and sexual limitations, has forced itself upon
Freud’s school. One was never weary of insisting that sexuality in the
psychological sense was not to be taken too literally, but in a broader
connotation; but exactly how, that remained obscure, and thus too,
sincere criticism remained unsatisfied.

I do not think I am going astray if I see the real value of the libido
theory in the energic conception, and not in its sexual definition.
Thanks to the former, we are in possession of a most valuable heuristic
principle. We owe to the energic conception the possibility of dynamic
ideas and relationships, which are of inestimable value for us in the
chaos of the psychic world. The Freudians would be wrong not to listen
to the voice of criticism, which reproaches our conception of libido
with mysticism and inaccessibility. We deceived ourselves in believing
that we could ever make the libido sexualis the bearer of the energic
conception of the psychical life, and if many of Freud’s school still
believe they possess a well-defined and almost complete conception of
libido, they are not aware that this conception has been put to use far
beyond the bounds of its sexual definition. The critics are right when
they object to our theory of libido as explaining things which cannot
belong to its sphere. It must be admitted that Freud’s school makes use
of a conception of libido which passes beyond the bounds of its primary
definition. Indeed, this must produce the impression that one is working
with a mystical principle.


                The Problem of Libido in Dementia Præcox


I have sought to show these infringements in a special work, “Wandlungen
und Symbole der Libido,” and at the same time the necessity for creating
a new conception of libido, which shall be in harmony with the energic
conception. Freud himself was forced to a discussion of his original
conception of libido when he tried to apply its energic point of view to
a well-known case of dementia præcox—the so-called Schreber case. In
this case, we had to deal, among other things, with that well-known
problem in the psychology of dementia præcox, the loss of adaptation to
reality, the peculiar phenomenon consisting in a special tendency of
these patients to construct an inner world of phantasy of their own,
surrendering for this purpose their adaptation to reality. As a part of
the phenomenon, the lack of sociability or emotional rapport will be
well known to you all, this representing a striking disturbance of the
function of reality. Through considerable psychological study of these
patients we discovered, that this lack of adaptation to reality is
compensated by a progressive increase in the creation of phantasies.
This goes so far that the dream-world is for the patient more real than
external reality. The patient Schreber, described by Freud, found for
this phenomenon an excellent figurative description in his delusion of
the “end of the world.” His loss of reality is thus very concretely
represented. The dynamic conception of this phenomenon is very clear. We
say that the libido withdrew itself more and more from the external
world, consequently entered the inner world, the world of phantasies,
and had there to create, as a compensation for the lost external world,
a so-called equivalent of reality. This compensation is built up piece
by piece, and it is most interesting to observe the psychological
materials of which this inner world is composed. This way of conceiving
the transposition and displacement of the libido has been made by the
every-day use of the term, its original pure sexual meaning being very
rarely recalled. In general, the word “libido” is used practically in so
harmless a sense that Claparède, in a conversation, once remarked that
we could as well use the word “interest.”

The manner in which this expression is generally used has given rise to
a way of using the term that made it possible to explain Schreber’s “end
of the world” by withdrawal of the libido. On this occasion, Freud
recalled his original sexual definition of the libido, and tried to
arrive at an understanding with the change which in the meantime had
taken place. In his article on Schreber, he discusses the question,
whether what the psychoanalytic school calls libido, and conceives of as
“interest from erotic sources” coincides with interest generally
speaking. You see that, putting the problem in this way, Freud asks the
question which Claparède practically answered. Freud discusses the
question here, whether the loss of reality noticed in dementia præcox,
to which I drew attention in my book,[6] “The Psychology of Dementia
Præcox,” is due entirely to the withdrawal of erotic interest, or if
this coincides with the so-called objective interest in general. We can
hardly agree that the normal “fonction du réel” [Janet] is only
maintained through erotic interest. The fact is that, in many cases,
reality vanishes altogether, and not a trace of psychological adaptation
can be found in these cases. Reality is repressed, and replaced by
phantasies created through complexes. We are forced to say that not only
the erotic interests, but interests in general—that is, the whole
adaptation to reality—are lost. I formerly tried, in my “Psychology of
Dementia Præcox,” to get out of this difficulty by using the expression
“psychic energy,” because I could not base the theory of dementia præcox
on the theory of transference of the libido in its sexual definition. My
experience—at that time chiefly psychiatric—did not permit me to
understand this theory. Only later did I learn to understand the
correctness of the theory as regards the neuroses by increased
experience in hysteria and the compulsion neurosis. As a matter of fact,
an abnormal displacement of libido, quite definitely sexual, does play a
great part in the neuroses. But although very characteristic repressions
of sexual libido do take place in certain neuroses, that loss of
reality, so typical for dementia præcox, never occurs. In dementia
præcox, so extreme is the loss of the function of reality that this loss
must also entail a loss of motive power, to which any sexual nature must
be absolutely denied, for it will not seem to anyone that reality is a
sexual function. If this were so, the withdrawal of erotic interests in
the neuroses would lead to a loss of reality—a loss of reality indeed
that could be compared with that in dementia præcox. But, as I said
before, this is not the case. These facts have made it impossible for me
to transfer Freud’s libido theory to dementia præcox. Hence, my view is,
that the attempt made by Abraham, in his article “The Psycho-Sexual
Differences Between Hysteria and Dementia Præcox,” is from the
standpoint of Freud’s conception of libido theoretically untenable.
Abraham’s belief, that the paranoidal system, or the symptomatology of
dementia præcox, arises by the libido withdrawing from the external
world, cannot be justified if we take “libido” according to Freud’s
definition. For, as Freud has clearly shown, a mere introversion or
regression of the libido leads always to a neurosis, and not to dementia
præcox. It is impossible to transfer the libido theory, with its sexual
definition, directly to dementia præcox, as this disease shows a loss of
reality not to be explained by the deficiency in erotic interests.

It gives me particular satisfaction that our master also, when he placed
his hand on the fragile material of paranoiac psychology, felt himself
compelled to doubt the applicability of his conception of libido which
had prevailed hitherto. My position of reserve towards the ubiquity of
sexuality which I allowed myself to adopt in the preface to my
“Psychology of Dementia Præcox”—although with a complete recognition of
the psychological mechanism—was dictated by the conception of the libido
theory of that time. Its sexual definition did not enable me to explain
those disturbances of functions which affect the indefinite sphere of
the instinct of hunger, just as much as they do those of sexuality. For
a long time the libido theory seemed to me inapplicable to dementia
præcox.


                    The Genetic Conception of Libido


With greater experience in my analytical work, I noticed that a slow
change of my conception of libido had taken place. A genetic conception
of libido gradually took the place of the descriptive definition of
libido contained in Freud’s “Three Contributions.” Thus it became
possible for me to replace, by the expression “psychic energy,” the term
libido. The next step was that I asked myself if now-a-days the function
of reality consists only to a very small extent of sexual libido, and to
a very large extent of other impulses. It is still a very important
question, considered from the phylogenetic standpoint, whether the
function of reality is not, at least very largely, of sexual origin. It
is impossible to answer this question directly, in so far as the
function of reality is concerned. We shall try to come to some
understanding by a side-path.

A superficial glance at the history of evolution suffices to teach us
that innumerable complicated functions, whose sexual character must be
denied, are originally nothing but derivations from the instinct of
propagation. As is well known, there has been an important displacement
in the fundamentals of propagation during the ascent through the animal
scale. The offspring has been reduced in number, and the primitive
uncertainty of impregnation has been replaced by a quite assured
impregnation, and a more effective protection of offspring. The energy
required for the production of eggs and sperma has been transferred into
the creation of mechanisms of attraction, and mechanisms for the
protection of offspring. Here we find the first instincts of art in
animals, used for the instinct of propagation, and limited to the
rutting season. The original sexual character of these biological
institutions became lost with their organic fixation, and their
functional independence. None the less, there can be no doubt as to
their sexual origin, as, for instance, there is no doubt about the
original relation between sexuality and music, but it would be a
generalization as futile, as unesthetic, to include music under the
category of sexuality. Such a terminology would lead to the
consideration of the Cathedral of Cologne under mineralogy, because it
has been built with stones. Those quite ignorant of the problems of
evolution are much astonished to find how few things there are in human
life which cannot finally be reduced to the instinct of propagation. It
embraces nearly everything, I think, that is dear and precious to us.

We have hitherto spoken of the libido as of the instinct of
reproduction, or the instinct of the preservation of the species, and
limited our conception to that libido which is opposed to hunger, just
as the instinct of the preservation of the species is opposed to that of
self-preservation. Of course in nature this artificial distinction does
not exist. Here we find only a continuous instinct of life, a will to
live, which tries to obtain the propagation of the whole race by the
preservation of the individual. To this extent this conception coincides
with that of Schopenhauer’s “will,” as objectively we can only conceive
a movement as a manifestation of an internal desire. As we have already
boldly concluded that the libido, which originally subserved the
creation of eggs and seed, is now firmly organized in the function of
nest-building, and can no longer be employed otherwise, we are similarly
obliged to include in this conception every desire, hunger no less. We
have no warrant whatever for differentiating essentially the desire to
build nests from the desire to eat.

I think you will already understand the position we have reached with
these considerations. We are about to follow up the energic conception
by putting the energic mode of action in place of the purely formal
functioning. Just as reciprocal actions, well known in the old natural
science, have been replaced by the law of the conservation of energy, so
here too, in the sphere of psychology, we seek to replace the reciprocal
activities of coordinated psychical faculties by energy, conceived as
one and homogeneous. Thus we must bow to the criticism which reproaches
the psychoanalytic school for working with a mystical conception of
libido. I have to dispel this illusion that the whole psychoanalytic
school possesses a clearly conceived and obvious conception of libido. I
maintain that the conception of libido with which we are working is not
only not concrete or known, but is an unknown _X_, a conceptual image, a
token, and no more real than the energy in the conceptual world of the
physicist. In this wise only can we escape those arbitrary
transgressions of the proper boundaries, which are always made when we
want to reduce coördinated forces to one another. Certain analogies of
the action of heat with the action of light are not to be explained by
saying that this tertium comparationis proves that the undulations of
heat are the same as the undulations of light; the conceptual image of
energy is the real point of comparison. If we regard libido in this way
we endeavor to simulate the progress which has already been made in
physics. The economy of thought which physics has already obtained we
strive after in our libido theory. We conceive libido now simply as
energy, so that we are in the position to figure the manifold processes
as forms of energy. Thus, we replace the old reciprocal action by
relations of absolute equivalence. We shall not be astonished if we are
met with the cry of vitalism. But we are as far removed from any belief
in a specific vital power, as from any other metaphysical assertion. We
term libido that energy which manifests itself by vital processes, which
is subjectively perceived as aspiration, longing and striving. We see in
the diversity of natural phenomena the desire, the libido, in the most
diverse applications and forms. In early childhood we find libido at
first wholly in the form of the instinct of nutrition, providing for the
development of the body. As the body develops, there open up,
successively, new spheres of influence for the libido. The last, and,
from its functional significance, most overpowering sphere of influence,
is sexuality, which at first seems very closely connected with the
function of nutrition. With that you may compare the well-known
influence on propagation of the conditions of nutrition in the lower
animals and plants.

In the sphere of sexuality, libido does take that form whose enormous
importance justifies us in the choice of the term “libido,” in its
strict sexual sense. Here for the first time libido appears in the form
of an undifferentiated sexual primitive power, as an energy of growth,
clearly forcing the individual towards division, budding, etc. The
clearest separation of the two forms of libido is found among those
animals where the stage of nutrition is separated by the pupa stage from
the stage of sexuality. Out of this sexual primitive power, through
which one small creature produces millions of eggs and sperm,
derivatives have been developed by extraordinary restriction of
fecundity, the functions of which are maintained by a special
differentiated libido. This differentiated libido is henceforth
_desexualized_, for it is dissociated from its original function of
producing eggs and sperm, nor is there any possibility of restoring it
to its original function. The whole process of development consists in
the increasing absorption of the libido which only created, originally,
products of generation in the secondary functions of attraction, and
protection of offspring. This development presupposes a quite different
and much more complicated relationship to reality, a true function of
reality which is functionally inseparable from the needs of
reproduction. Thus the altered mode of reproduction involves a
correspondingly increased adaptation to reality. This, of course, does
not imply that the function of reality is exclusively due to
differentiation in reproduction. I am aware that a large part of the
instinct of nutrition is connected with it. Thus we arrive at an insight
into certain primitive conditions of the function of reality. It would
be fundamentally wrong to pretend that the compelling source is still a
sexual one. It _was_ largely a sexual one originally. The process of
absorption of the primitive libido into secondary functions certainly
always took place in the form of so-called affluxes of sexual libido
(“libidinöse Zuschüsse”).

That is to say, sexuality was diverted from its original destination, a
definite quantity was used up in the mechanisms of mutual attraction and
of protection of offspring. This transference of sexual libido from the
sexual sphere to associated functions is still taking place (_e. g._,
modern neo-Malthusianism is the artificial continuation of the natural
tendency). We call this process _sublimation_, when this operation
occurs without injury to the adaptation of the individual; we call it
_repression_—when the attempt fails. From the descriptive standpoint
psychoanalysis accepts the multiplicity of instincts, and, among them,
the instinct of sexuality as a special phenomenon, moreover, it
recognizes certain affluxes of the libido to asexual instincts.

From the genetic standpoint it is otherwise. It regards the multiplicity
of instincts as issuing out of relative unity, the primitive libido. It
recognizes that definite quantities of the primitive libido are split
off, associated with the recently created functions, and finally merged
in them. From this standpoint we can say, without any difficulty, that
patients with dementia præcox withdraw their “libido” from the external
world and in consequence suffer a loss of reality, which is compensated
by an increase of the phantasy-building activities.

We must now fit the new conception of libido into that theory of
sexuality in childhood which is of such great importance in the theory
of neurosis. Generally speaking, we first find the libido as the energy
of vital activities acting in the zone of the function of nutrition.
Through the rhythmical movements in the act of sucking, nourishment is
taken with all signs of satisfaction. As the individual grows and his
organs develop, the libido creates new ways of desire, new activities
and satisfactions. Now the original model—rhythmic activity, creating
pleasure and satisfaction—must be transferred to other functions which
have their final goal in sexuality.

This transition is not made suddenly at puberty, but it takes place
gradually throughout the course of the greater part of childhood. The
libido can only very slowly and with great difficulty detach itself from
the characteristics of the function of nutrition, in order to pass over
into the characteristics of sexual function. As far as I can see, we
have two epochs during this transition, the epoch of _sucking_ and the
epoch of the _displaced rhythmic activity_. Considered solely from the
point of view of its mode of action, sucking clings entirely to the
domain of the function of nutrition, but it presents also a far wider
aspect, it is no mere function of nutrition, it is a rhythmical
activity, with its goal in a pleasure and satisfaction of its own,
distinct from the obtaining of nourishment. The hand comes into play as
an accessory organ. In the epoch of the displaced rhythmical activity it
stands out still more as an accessory organ, when the oral zone ceases
to give pleasure, which must now be obtained in other directions. The
possibilities are many. As a rule the other openings of the body become
the first objects of interest of the libido; then follow the skin in
general and certain places of predilection upon it.

The actions carried out at these places generally take the form of
rubbing, piercing, tugging, etc., accompanied by a certain rhythm, and
serve to produce pleasure. After a halt of greater or less duration at
these stations, the libido proceeds until it arrives at the sexual zone,
where it may next provoke the first onanistic attempts. During its
“march,” the libido carries over not a little from the function of
nutrition into the sexual zone; this readily explains the numerous close
associations between the function of nutrition and the sexual function.

This “march” of the libido takes place at the time of the pre-sexual
stage, which is characterized by the fact that the libido gradually
relinquishes the special character of the instinct of nutrition, and by
degrees acquires the character of the sexual instinct. At this stage we
cannot yet speak of a true sexual libido. Therefore we are obliged to
qualify the polymorphous perverse sexuality of early infancy
differently. The polymorphism of the tendencies of the libido at this
time is to be explained as the gradual movement of the libido away from
the sphere of the function of nutrition towards the sexual function.

_The Infantile “Perversity.”_—Thus rightly vanishes the term
“perverse”—so strongly contested by our opponents—for it provokes a
false idea.

When a chemical body breaks up into its elements, these elements are the
products of its disintegration, but it is not permissible on that
account to describe elements as entirely products of disintegration.
Perversities are disorders of fully-developed sexuality, but are never
precursors of sexuality, although there is undoubtedly an analogy
between the precursors and the products of disintegration. The childish
rudiments, no longer to be conceived as perverse, but to be regarded as
stages of development, change gradually into normal sexuality, as the
normal sexuality develops.

The more smoothly the libido withdraws from its provisional positions,
the more completely and the more quickly does the formation of normal
sexuality take place. It is proper to the conception of normal sexuality
that all those early infantile inclinations which are not yet sexual
should be given up. The less this is the case, the more is sexuality
threatened with perverse development. The expression “perverse” is here
used in its right place. The fundamental condition of a perversity is an
infantile, imperfectly developed state of sexuality.

Footnote 5:

  No. 7 of this Monograph Series.

Footnote 6:

  No. 3 of this Monograph Series.




                               CHAPTER IV
        The Etiological Significance of the Infantile Sexuality


Now that we have decided what is to be understood as infantile
sexuality, we can follow up the discussion of the theory of the
neuroses, which we began in the first lecture and then dropped. We
followed the theory of the neuroses up to the point where we ran against
Freud’s statement, that the tendency which brings a traumatic event to a
pathological activity, is a sexual one. From our foregoing
considerations we understand what is meant by a sexual tendency. It is a
standing still, a retardation in that process whereby the libido frees
itself from the manifestations of the pre-sexual stage.

First of all, we must regard this disturbance as a _fixation_. The
libido, in its transition from the function of nutrition to the sexual
function, lingers unduly at certain stages. A disharmony is created,
since provisional and, as it were, worn-out activities, persist at a
period when they should have been overcome. This formula is applicable
to all those infantile characteristics so prevalent among neurotic
people that no attentive observer can have overlooked them. In dementia
præcox it is so obtrusive that a symptom complex, hebephrenia, derives
its name therefrom.

The matter is not ended, however, by saying that the libido lingers in
the preliminary stages, for while the libido thus lingers, time does not
stand still, and the development of the individual is always proceeding
apace. The physical maturation increases the contrast and the disharmony
between the persistent infantile manifestations, and the demands of the
later age, with its changed conditions of life. In this way the
foundation is laid for the dissociation of the personality, and thereby
to that conflict which is the real basis of the neuroses. The more the
libido is in arrears in practice, the more intense will be the conflict.
The traumatic or pathogenic moment is the one which serves best to make
this conflict manifest. As Freud showed in his earlier works, one can
easily imagine a neurosis arising in this way.

This conception fitted in rather well with the views of Janet, who
ascribed neurosis to a certain defect. From this point of view the
neurosis could be regarded as a product of retardation in the
development of affectivity; and I can easily imagine that this
conception must seem selfevident to every one who is inclined to derive
the neuroses more or less directly from heredity or congenital
degeneration.


                The Infantile Sexual Etiology Criticized


Unfortunately the reality is much more complicated. Let me facilitate an
insight into these complications by an example of a case of hysteria. It
will, I hope, enable me to demonstrate the characteristic complication,
so important for the theory of neurosis. You will probably remember the
case of the young lady with hysteria, whom I mentioned at the beginning
of my lectures. We noticed the remarkable fact that this patient was
unaffected by situations which one might have expected to make a
profound impression and yet showed an unexpected extreme pathological
reaction to a quite everyday event. We took this occasion to express our
doubt as to the etiological significance of the shock, and to
investigate the so-called predisposition which rendered the trauma
effective. The result of that investigation led us to what has just been
mentioned, that it is by no means improbable that the origin of the
neurosis is due to a retardation of the affective development.

You will now ask me what is to be understood by the retardation of the
affectivity of this hysteric. The patient lives in a world of phantasy,
which can only be regarded as infantile. It is unnecessary to give a
description of these phantasies, for you, as neurologists or
psychiatrists, have the opportunity daily to listen to the childish
prejudices, illusions and emotional pretensions to which neurotic people
give way. The disinclination to face stern reality is the distinguishing
trait of these phantasies—some lack of earnestness, some trifling, which
sometimes hides real difficulties in a light-hearted manner, at others
exaggerates trifles into great troubles. We recognize at once that
inadequate psychic attitude towards reality which characterizes the
child, its wavering opinions and its deficient orientation in matters of
the external world. With such an infantile mental disposition all kinds
of desires, phantasies and illusions can grow luxuriantly, and this we
have to regard as the critical causation. Through such phantasies people
slip into an unreal attitude, preeminently ill-adapted to the world,
which is bound some day to lead to a catastrophe. When we trace back the
infantile phantasy of the patient to her earliest childhood we find, it
is true, many distinct, outstanding scenes which might well serve to
provide fresh food for this or that variation in phantasy, but it would
be vain to search for the so-called traumatic motive, whence something
abnormal might have sprung, such an abnormal activity, let us say, as
day-dreaming itself. There are certainly to be found traumatic scenes,
although not in earliest childhood; the few scenes of earliest childhood
which were remembered seem not to be traumatic, being rather accidental
events, which passed by without leaving any effect on her phantasy worth
mentioning. The earliest phantasies arose out of all sorts of vague and
only partly understood impressions received from her parents. Many
peculiar feelings centered around her father, vacillating between
anxiety, horror, aversion, disgust, love and enthusiasm. The case was
like so many other cases of hysteria, where no traumatic etiology can be
found, but which grows from the roots of a peculiar and premature
activity of phantasy which maintains permanently the character of
infantilism.

You will object that in this case the scene with the shying horses
represents the trauma. It is clearly the model of that night-scene which
happened nineteen years later, where the patient was incapable of
avoiding the trotting horses. That she wanted to plunge into the river
has an analogy in the model scene, where the horses and carriage fell
into the river.

Since the latter traumatic moment she suffered from hysterical fits. As
I tried to show you, we do not find any trace of this apparent etiology
developed in the course of her phantasy life. It seems as if the danger
of losing her life, that first time, when the horses shied, passed
without leaving any emotional trace. None of the events that occurred in
the following years showed any trace of that fright. In parenthesis let
me add, that perhaps it never happened at all. It may have even been a
mere phantasy, for I have only the assertions of the patient. All of a
sudden, some eighteen years later, this event becomes of importance and
is, so to say, reproduced and carried out in all its details. This
assumption is extremely unlikely, and becomes still more inconceivable
if we also bear in mind that the story of the shying horses may not even
be true. Be that as it may, it is and remains almost unthinkable that an
affect should remain buried for years and then suddenly explode. In
other cases there is exactly the same state of affairs. I know, for
instance, of a case in which the shock of an earthquake, long recovered
from, suddenly came back as a lively fear of earthquakes, although this
reminiscence could not be explained by the external circumstances.


                    The Traumatic Theory—A False Way


It is a very suspicious circumstance that these patients frequently show
a pronounced tendency to account for their illnesses by some long-past
event, ingeniously withdrawing the attention of the physician from the
present moment towards some false track in the past. This false track
was the first one pursued by the psychoanalytic theory. To this false
hypothesis we owe an insight into the understanding of the neurotic
symptoms never before reached, an insight we should not have gained if
the investigation had not chosen this path, really guided thither,
however, by the misleading tendencies of the patient.

I think that only a man who regards world-happenings as a chain of more
or less fortuitous contingencies, and therefore believes that the
guiding hand of the reason-endowed pedagogue is permanently wanted, can
ever imagine that this path, upon which the patient leads the physician,
has been a wrong one, from which one ought to have warned men off with a
sign-board. Besides the deeper insight into psychological determination,
we owe to the so-called error the discovery of questions of immeasurable
importance regarding the basis of psychic processes. It is for us to
rejoice and be thankful that Freud had the courage to let himself be
guided along this path. Not thus is the progress of science hindered,
but rather through blind adherence to a provisional formulation, through
the typical conservatism of authority, the vanity of learned men, their
fear of making mistakes. This lack of the martyr’s courage is far more
injurious to the credit and greatness of scientific knowledge than an
honest error.


                Retardation of the Emotional Development


But let us return to our own case. The following question arises: If the
old trauma is not of etiological significance, then the cause of the
manifest neurosis is probably to be found in the retardation of the
emotional development. We must therefore disregard the patient’s
assertion that her hysterical crises date from the fright from the
shying horses, although this fright was in fact the beginning of her
evident illness. This event only seems to be important, although it is
not so in reality. This same formula is valid for all the so-called
shocks. They only seem to be important because they are the
starting-point of the external expression of an abnormal condition. As
explained in detail, this abnormal condition is an anachronistic
continuation of an infantile stage of libido-development. These patients
still retain forms of the libido which they ought to have renounced long
ago. It is impossible to give a list, as it were, of these forms, for
they are of an extraordinary variety. The most common, which is scarcely
ever absent, is the excessive activity of phantasies, characterized by
an unconcerned exaggeration of subjective wishes. This exaggerated
activity is always a sign of want of proper employment of the libido.
The libido sticks fast to its use in phantasies, instead of being
employed in a more rigorous adaptation to the real conditions of life.


                              Introversion


This state is called the state of _introversion_, the libido is used for
the psychical inner world instead of being applied to the external
world. A regular attendant symptom of this retardation in the emotional
development is the so-called parent-complex. If the libido is not used
entirely for the adaptation to reality, it is always more or less
introverted. The material content of the psychic world is composed of
reminiscences, giving it a vividness of activity which in reality long
since ceased to pertain thereto. The consequence is, that these patients
still live more or less in a world which in truth belongs to the past.
They fight with difficulties which once played a part in their life, but
which ought to have been obliterated long ago. They still grieve over
matters, or rather they are still concerned with matters, which should
have long ago lost their importance for them. They divert themselves, or
distress themselves, with images which were once normally of importance
for them but are of no significance at their later age.


                       The Complex of the Parents


Amongst those influences most important during childhood, the
personalities of the parents play the most potent part. Even if the
parents have long been dead, and might and should have lost all real
importance, since the life-conditions of the patients are perhaps
totally changed, yet these parents are still somehow present and as
important as if they were still alive. Love and admiration, resistance,
repugnance, hate and revolt, still cling to their figures, transfigured
by affection and very often bearing little resemblance to the past
reality. It was this fact which forced me to talk no longer of father
and mother directly, but to employ instead the term “image” (imago) of
mother or of father for these phantasies no longer deal with the real
father and the real mother, but with the subjective, and very often
completely altered creations of the imagination which prolong an
existence only in the patient’s mind.

The complex of the parents’ images, that is to say, the sum of ideas
connected with the parents, provides an important field of employment
for the introverted libido. I must mention in passing that the complex
has in itself but a shadowy existence in so far as it is not invested
with libido. Following the usage that we arrived at in the
“Diagnostische Associationsstudien,” the word “complex” is used for a
system of ideas already invested with, and actuated by, libido. This
system exists as a mere possibility, ready for application, if not
invested with libido either temporarily or permanently.

_The “Nucleus”-Complex._—At the time when the psychoanalytic theory was
still under the dominance of the trauma conception and, in conformity
with that view, inclined to look for the causa efficiens of the neurosis
in the past, the parent-complex seemed to us to be the so-called
root-complex—to employ Freud’s term—or nucleus-complex (“Kerncomplex”).

The part which the parents played seemed to be so highly determining
that we were inclined to attribute to them all later complications in
the life of the patient. Some years ago I discussed this view in my
article[7] “Die Bedeutung des Vaters für das Schicksal des Einzelnen.”
(The importance of the father for the fate of the individual.)

Here also we were guided by the patient’s tendency to revert to the
past, in accordance with the direction of his introverted libido. Now
indeed it was no longer the external, accidental event which caused the
pathogenic effect, but a psychological effect which seemed to arise out
of the individual’s difficulties in adapting himself to the conditions
of his familiar surroundings. It was especially the disharmony between
the parents on the one hand and between the child and the parents on the
other which seemed favorable for creating currents in the child little
compatible with his individual course of life. In the article just
alluded to I have described some instances, taken from a wealth of
material, which show these characteristics very distinctly. The
influence of the parents does not come to an end, alas, with their
neurotic descendants’ blame of the family circumstances, or their false
education, as the basis of their illness, but it extends even to certain
actual events in the life and actions of the patient, where such a
determining influence could not have been expected. The lively
imitativeness which we find in savages as well as in children can
produce in certain rather sensitive children a peculiar inner and
unconscious identification with the parents; that is to say, such a
similar mental attitude that effects in real life are sometimes produced
which, even in detail, resemble the personal experiences of the parents.
For the empirical material here, I must refer you to the literature. I
should like to remind you that one of my pupils, Dr. Emma Fürst,
produced valuable experimental proofs for the solution of this problem,
to which I referred in my lecture at Clark University.[8] In applying
association experiments to whole families, Dr. Fürst established the
great resemblance of reaction-type among all the members of one family.

These experiments show that there very often exists an unconscious
parallelism of association between parents and children, to be explained
as an intense imitation or identification.

The results of these investigations show far-reaching psychological
tendencies in parallel directions, which readily explain at times the
astonishing conformity in their destinies. Our destinies are as a rule
the result of our psychological tendencies. These facts allow us to
understand why, not only the patient, but even the theory which has been
built on such investigations, expresses the view, that the neurosis is
the result of the characteristic influence of the parents upon their
children. This view, moreover, is supported by the experiences which lie
at the basis of pedagogy: namely the assumption of the plasticity of the
child’s mind, which is freely compared with soft wax.

We know that the first impressions of childhood accompany us throughout
life, and that certain educational influences may restrain people
undisturbed all their lives within certain limits. It is no miracle,
indeed it is rather a frequent experience, that under these
circumstances a conflict has to break out between the personality which
is formed by the educational and other influences of the infantile
milieu and that one which can be described as the real individual line
of life. With this conflict all people must meet, who are called upon to
live an independent and productive life.

Owing to the enormous influence of childhood on the later development of
character, you can perfectly understand why we are inclined to ascribe
the cause of a neurosis directly to the influences of the infantile
environment. I have to confess that I have known cases in which any
other explanation seemed to be less reasonable. There are indeed parents
whose own contradictory neurotic behavior causes them to treat their
children in such an unreasonable way that the latter’s deterioration and
illness would seem to be unavoidable. Hence it is almost a rule among
nerve-specialists to remove neurotic children, whenever possible, from
the dangerous family atmosphere, and to send them among more healthy
influences, where, without any medical treatment, they thrive much
better than at home. There are many neurotic patients who were clearly
neurotic as children, and who have never been free from illness. For
such cases, the conception which has been sketched holds generally good.

This knowledge, which seems to be provisionally definitive, has been
extended by the studies of Freud and the psychoanalytic school. The
relations between the patients and their parents have been studied in
detail in as much as these relations were regarded as of etiological
significance.


                       Infantile Mental Attitude


It was soon noticed that such patients lived still partly or wholly in
their childhood-world, although quite unconscious themselves of this
fact. It is a difficult task for psychoanalysis so exactly to
investigate the psychological mode of adaptation of the patients as to
be capable of putting its finger on the infantile misunderstanding. We
find among neurotics many who have been spoiled as children. These cases
give the best and clearest example of the infantilism of their
psychological mode of adaptation. They start out in life expecting the
same friendly reception, tenderness and easy success, obtained with no
trouble, to which they have been accustomed by their parents in their
youth. Even very intelligent patients are not capable of seeing at once
that they owe the complications of their life and their neurosis to the
trail of their infantile emotional attitude. The small world of the
child, the familiar surroundings—these form the model of the big world.
The more intensely the family has stamped the child, the more will it be
inclined, as an adult, instinctively to see again in the great world its
former small world. Of course this must not be taken as a conscious
intellectual process. On the contrary, the patient feels and sees the
difference between now and then, and tries to adapt himself as well as
he can. Perhaps he will even believe himself perfectly adapted, for he
grasps the situation intellectually, but that does not prevent the
emotional from being far behind the intellectual standpoint.


                          Unconscious Phantasy


It is unnecessary to trouble you with instances of this phenomenon. It
is an every-day experience that our emotions are never at the level of
our reasoning. It is exactly the same with such a patient, only with
greater intensity. He may perhaps believe that, save for his neurosis,
he is a normal person, and hence adapted to the conditions of life. He
does not suspect that he has not relinquished certain childish
pretensions, that he still carries with him, in the background,
expectations and illusions which he has never rendered conscious to
himself. He cultivates all sorts of favorite phantasies, which seldom
become conscious, or at any rate, not very often, so that he himself
does not know that he has them. They very often exist only as emotional
expectations, hopes, prejudices, etc. We call these phantasies,
unconscious phantasies. Sometimes they dip into the peripheral
consciousness as quite fugitive thoughts, which disappear again a moment
later, so that the patient is unable to say whether he had such
phantasies or not. It is only during the psychoanalytic treatment that
most patients learn to observe and retain these fleeting thoughts.
Although most of the phantasies, once at least, have been conscious in
the form of fleeting thoughts and only afterwards became unconscious, we
have no right to call them on that account “conscious,” as they are
practically most of the time unconscious. It is therefore right to
designate them “unconscious phantasies.” Of course there are also
infantile phantasies, which are perfectly conscious and which can be
reproduced at any time.

Footnote 7:

  Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und psychopathologisch Forschungen, Bd.
  I.

Footnote 8:

  Am. Jour. Psychol., April, 1910.




                               CHAPTER V
                            The Unconscious


The sphere of the unconscious infantile phantasies has become the real
object of psychoanalytic investigation. As we have previously pointed
out, this domain seems to retain the key to the etiology of neurosis. In
contradistinction with the trauma theory, we are forced by the reasons
already adduced to seek in the family history for the basis of our
present psychoanalytic attitude. Those phantasy-systems which patients
exhibit on mere questioning are for the most part composed and
elaborated like a novel or a drama. Although they are greatly
elaborated, they are relatively of little value for the investigation of
the unconscious. Just because they are conscious, they have already
deferred over-much to the claims of etiquette and social morality. Hence
they have been purged of all personally painful and ugly details, and
are presentable to society, revealing very little. The valuable, and
much more important phantasies are not conscious in the sense already
defined, but are to be discovered through the technique of
psychoanalysis.

Without wishing to enter fully into the question of technique, I must
here meet an objection that is constantly heard. It is that the
so-called unconscious phantasies are only suggested to the patient and
only exist in the minds of psychoanalysts. This objection belongs to
that common class which ascribes to them the crude mistakes of
beginners. I think only those without psychological experience and
without historical psychological knowledge are capable of making such
criticisms. With a mere glimmering of mythological knowledge, one cannot
fail to notice the striking parallels between the unconscious phantasies
discovered by the psychoanalytic school and mythological images. The
objection that our knowledge of mythology has been suggested to the
patient is groundless, for the psychoanalytic school first discovered
the unconscious phantasies, and only then became acquainted with
mythology. Mythology itself is obviously something outside the path of
the medical man. In so far as these phantasies are unconscious, the
patient of course knows nothing about their existence, and it would be
absurd to make direct inquiries about them. Nevertheless it is often
said, both by patients and by so-called normal persons: “But if I had
such phantasies, surely I would know something about them.” But what is
unconscious is, in fact, something which one does not know. The
opposition too is perfectly convinced that such things as unconscious
phantasies could not exist. This a priori judgment is scholasticism, and
has no sensible grounds. We cannot possibly rest on the dogma that
consciousness only is mind, when we can convince ourselves daily that
our consciousness is only the stage. When the contents of our
consciousness appear they are already in a highly complex form; the
grouping of our thoughts from the elements supplied by our memory is
almost entirely unconscious. Therefore we are obliged, whether we like
it or not, to accept for the moment the conception of an unconscious
psychic sphere, even if only as a mere negative, border-conception, just
as Kant’s “thing in itself.” As we perceive things which do not have
their origin in consciousness, we are obliged to give hypothetic
contents to the sphere of the non-conscious. We must suppose that the
origin of certain effects lies in the unconscious, just because they are
not conscious. The reproach of mysticism can scarcely be made against
this conception of the unconscious. We do not pretend that we know
anything positive, or can affirm anything, about the psychic condition
of the unconscious. Instead, we have substituted symbols by following
the way of designation and abstraction we apply in consciousness.

On the axiom: Principia præter necessitatem non sunt multiplicanda, this
kind of ideation is the only possible one. Hence we speak about the
effects of the unconscious, just as we do about the phenomena of the
conscious. Many people have been shocked by Freud’s statement: “The
unconscious can only wish,” and this is regarded as an unheard of
metaphysical assertion, something like the principle of Hartman’s
“Philosophy of the Unconscious,” which apparently administers a rebuff
to the theory of cognition. This indignation only arises from the fact
that the critics, unknown to themselves, evidently start from a
metaphysical conception of the unconscious as being an “end per se,” and
naïvely project on to us their inadequate conception of the unconscious.
For us, the unconscious is no entity, but a term, about whose
metaphysical entity we do not permit ourselves to form any idea. Here we
contrast with those psychologists, who, sitting at their desks, are as
exactly informed about the localization of the mind in the brain as they
are informed about the psychological correlation of the mental
processes. Whence they are able to declare positively that beyond the
consciousness there are but physiological processes of the cortex. Such
naiveté must not be imputed to the psychoanalyst. When Freud says: “We
can only wish,” he describes in symbolic terms effects of which the
origin is not known. From the standpoint of our conscious thinking,
these effects can only be considered as analogous to wishes. The
psychoanalytic school is, moreover, aware that the discussion as to
whether “wishing” is a sound analogy can be re-opened at any time.
Anyone who has more information is welcome. Instead, the opponents
content themselves with denial of the phenomena, or if certain phenomena
are admitted, they abstain from all theoretical speculation. This last
point is readily to be understood, for it is not everyone’s business to
think theoretically. Even the man who has succeeded in freeing himself
from the dogma of the identity of the conscious self and the psyche,
thus admitting the possible existence of psychic processes outside the
conscious, is not justified in disputing or maintaining psychic
possibilities in the unconscious. The objection is raised that the
psychoanalytic school maintains certain views without sufficient
grounds, as if the literature did not contain abundant, perhaps too
abundant, discussion of cases, and more than enough arguments. But they
seem not to be sufficient for the opponents. There must be a good deal
of difference as to the meaning of the term “sufficient” in respect to
the validity of the arguments. The question is: “Why does the
psychoanalytic school apparently set less store on the proof of their
formulas than the critics?” The reason is very simple. An engineer who
has built a bridge, and has worked out its bearing capacity, wants no
other proof for the success of its bearing power. But the ordinary man,
who has no notion how a bridge is built, or what is the strength of the
material used, will demand quite different proofs as to the bearing
capacity of the bridge, for he has no confidence in the business. In the
first place, it is the critics’ complete ignorance of what is being done
which provokes their demand. In the second place, there are the
unanswerable theoretical misunderstandings: impossible for us to know
them all and understand them all. Just as we find, again and again, in
our patients new and astonishing misunderstandings about the ways and
the aim of the psychoanalytic method, so are the critics inexhaustible
in devising misunderstandings. You can see in the discussion of our
conception of the unconscious what kind of false philosophical
assumptions can prevent the understanding of our terminology. It is
comprehensible that those who attribute to the unconscious involuntarily
an absolute entity, require quite different arguments, beyond our power
to give. Had we to prove immortality, we should have to collect many
more important arguments, than if we had merely to demonstrate the
existence of plasmodia in a malaria patient. The metaphysical
expectation still disturbs the scientific way of thinking, so that
problems of psychoanalysis cannot be considered in a simple way. But I
do not wish to be unjust to the critics, and I will admit that the
psychoanalytic school itself very often gives rise to misunderstandings,
although innocently enough. One of the principal sources of these
mistakes is the confusion in the theoretical sphere. It is a pity, but
we have no presentable theory. But you would understand this, if you
could see, in a concrete case, with what difficulties we have to deal.
In contradiction to the opinion of nearly all critics, Freud is by no
means a theorist. He is an empiricist, of which fact anyone can easily
convince himself, if he is willing to busy himself somewhat more deeply
with Freud’s works, and if he tries to go into the cases as Freud has
done. Unfortunately, the critics are not willing. As we have very often
heard, it is too disgusting and too repulsive, to observe cases in the
same way as Freud has done. But who will learn the nature of Freud’s
method, if he allows himself to be hindered by repulsion and disgust?
Because they neglect to apply themselves to the point of view adopted by
Freud, perhaps as a necessary working hypothesis, they come to the
absurd supposition that Freud is a theorist. They then readily agree
that Freud’s “Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory” is a priori
invented by a merely speculative brain which afterwards suggests
everything into the patient. That is putting things upside down. This
gives the critics an easy task, and this is just what they want to have.
They pay no attention to the observations of the psychoanalysts,
conscientiously set forth in their histories of diseases, but only to
the theory, and to the formulation of technique. The weak spot of
psychoanalysis, however, is not found here, as psychoanalysis is only
empirical. Here you find but a large and insufficiently cultivated
field, in which the critics can exercise themselves to their full
satisfaction. There are many uncertainties, and as many contradictions,
in the sphere of this theory. We were conscious of this long before the
first critic began to pay attention to our work.




                               CHAPTER VI
                               The Dream


After this digression we will return to the question of the unconscious
phantasies which occupied us before. As we have seen, nobody can dispute
their existence, just as nobody can assert their existence and their
qualities forthwith. The question, however, is just this: Can effects be
observed in the consciousness of unconscious origin, which can be
described in conscious symbolic signs or expressions? Can there be
found, in the conscious, effects which correspond with this expectation?
The psychoanalytic school believes it has discovered such effects. Let
me mention at once the principal phenomenon, the dream. Of this it may
be said that it appears in the consciousness as a complex factor
unconsciously constructed out of its elements. The origin of the images
in certain reminiscences of the earlier or of the later past can be
proved through the associations belonging to the single images of the
dream. We ask: “Where did you see this?” or “Where did you hear that?”
And through the usual way of association come the reminiscences that
certain parts of the dream have been consciously experienced, some the
day before, some on former occasions. So far there will be general
agreement, for these things are well known. In so far, the dream
represents in general an incomprehensible composition of certain
elements not at first conscious, which are only recognized later on by
their associations. It is not that all parts of the dream are
recognizable, whence its conscious character could be deduced; on the
contrary, they are often, and indeed mostly, unrecognizable at first.
Only subsequently does it occur to us that we have experienced in
consciousness this or that part of the dream. From this standpoint
alone, we might regard the dream as an effect of unconscious origin.


                      The Method of Dream Analysis


The technique for the exploration of the unconscious origin is the one I
mentioned before, used before Freud by every scientific man who
attempted to arrive at a psychological understanding of dreams. We try
simply to remember where the parts of the dream arose. The
psychoanalytic technique for the interpretation of dreams is based on
this very simple principle. It is a fact that certain parts of the dream
originate in daily life, that is, in events which, on account of their
slighter importance, would have fallen into oblivion, and indeed were on
the way to become definitely unconscious. It is these parts of the dream
that are the effect of unconscious images and representations. People
have been shocked by this expression also. But we do not conceive these
things so concretely, not to say crudely, as do the critics. Certainly
this expression is nothing but a symbolism taken from conscious
psychology—we were never in any doubt as to that. The expression is
quite clear and answers very well as a symbol of an unknown psychic
fact.

As we mentioned before, we can conceive the unconscious only by analogy
with the conscious. We do not imagine that we understand a thing when we
have discovered a beautiful and rather incomprehensible name. The
principle of the psychoanalytic technique is, as you see,
extraordinarily simple. The further procedure follows on in the same
way. If we occupy ourselves long with a dream, a thing which, apart from
psychoanalysis, naturally never happens, we are apt to find still more
reminiscences to the various different parts of the dream. We are not
however always successful in finding reminiscences to certain portions.
We have to put aside these dreams, or parts of dreams, whether we will
or no.

The collected reminiscences are called the “_dream material_.” We treat
this material by a universally valid scientific method. If you ever have
to work up experimental material, you compare the individual units and
classify them according to similarities. You proceed exactly in the same
way with dream-material; you look for the common traits either of a
formal or a substantial nature.

Certain extremely common prejudices must be got rid of. I have always
noticed that the beginner is looking for one trait or another and tries
to make his material conform to his expectation. This condition I
noticed especially among those colleagues who were formerly more or less
passionate opponents of psychoanalysis, their opposition being based on
well-known prejudices and misunderstandings. When I had the chance of
analyzing them, whereby they obtained at last a real insight into the
method, the first mistake generally made in their own psychoanalytic
work was that they did violence to the material by their own
preconceived opinion. They gave vent to their former prejudice against
psychoanalysis in their attitude towards the material, which they could
not estimate objectively, but only according to their subjective
phantasies.

If one would have the courage to sift dream material, one must not
recoil from any parallel. The dream material generally consists of very
heterogeneous associations, out of which it is sometimes very difficult
to deduce the tertium comparationis. I refrain from giving detailed
examples, as it is quite impossible to handle in a lecture the
voluminous material of a dream. I might call your attention to Rank’s[9]
article in the Jahrbuch, “Ein Traum der sich selber deutet” (A dream
interpreted by itself). There you will see what an extensive material
must be taken into consideration for comparison.

Hence, for the interpretation of the unconscious we proceed in the same
way as is universal when a conclusion is to be drawn by classifying
material. The objection is very often heard: Why does the dream have an
unconscious content at all? In my view, this objection is as
unscientific as possible. Every actual psychological moment has its
special history. Every sentence I pronounce has, beside the intended
meaning known to me another historical meaning, and it is possible that
its second meaning is entirely different from its conscious meaning. I
express myself on purpose somewhat paradoxically. I do not mean that I
could explain every individual sentence in its historical meaning. This
is a thing easier to do in larger and more detailed contributions. It
will be clear to everyone, that a poem is, apart from its manifest
content, especially characteristic of the poet in regard to its form,
its content, and its manner of origin. Although the poet, in his poem,
gave expression to the mood of a moment, the literary historian will
find things in it and behind it which the poet never foresaw. The
analysis which the literary historian draws from the poet’s material is
exactly the method of psychoanalysis.

The psychoanalytic method, generally speaking, can be compared with
historical analysis and synthesis. Suppose, for instance, we did not
understand the meaning of baptism as practised in our churches to-day.
The priest tells us the baptism means the admission of the child into
the Christian community. But this does not satisfy us. Why is the child
sprinkled with water? To understand this ceremony, we must choose out of
the history of rites, those human traditions which pertain to this
subject, and thus we get material for comparison, to be considered from
different standpoints.

I. The baptism means obviously an initiation ceremony, a consecration;
therefore all the traditions containing initiation rites have to be
consulted.

II. The baptism takes place with water. This special form requires
another series of traditions, namely, those rites where water is used.

III. The person to be baptized is sprinkled with water. Here are to be
consulted all those rites where the initiated is sprinkled or submerged,
etc.

IV. All the reminiscences of folklore, the superstitious practices must
be remembered, which in any way run parallel with the symbolism of the
baptismal act.

In this way, we get a comparative scientific study of religion as
regards baptism. We accordingly discover the different elements out of
which the act of baptism has arisen. We ascertain further its original
meaning, and we become at the same time acquainted with the rich world
of myths that have contributed to the foundations of religions, and thus
we are enabled to understand the manifold and profound meanings of
baptism. The analyst proceeds in the same way with the dream. He
collects the historical parallels to every part of the dream, even the
remotest, and he tries to reconstruct the psychological history of the
dream, with its fundamental meaning, exactly as in the analysis of the
act of baptism. Thus, through the monographic treatment of the dream, we
get a profound and beautiful insight into that mysterious, fine and
ingenious network of unconscious determination. We get an insight, which
as I said before, can only be compared with the historical understanding
of any act which we had hitherto regarded in a superficial and one-sided
way.

This digression on the psychoanalytic method has seemed to me to be
unavoidable. I was obliged to give you an account of the method and its
position in methodology, by reason of all the extensive
misunderstandings which are constantly attempting to discredit it. I do
not doubt that there are superficial and improper interpretations of the
method. But an intelligent critic ought never to allow this to be a
reproach to the method itself, any more than a bad surgeon should be
urged as an objection to the common validity of surgery. I do not doubt
that some inaccurate descriptions and conceptions of the psychoanalytic
method have arisen on the part of the psychoanalytic school itself. But
this is due to the fact that, because of their education in natural
science it is difficult for medical men to attain a full grasp of
historical or philological method, although they instinctively handle it
rightly.

The method I have described to you, in this general way, is the method
that I adopt and for which I assume the scientific responsibility.

In my opinion it is absolutely reprehensible and unscientific to
question about dreams, or to try to interpret them directly. This is not
a methodological, but an arbitrary proceeding, which is its own
punishment, for it is as unproductive as every false method.

If I have made the attempt to demonstrate to you the principle of the
psychoanalytic school by dream-analysis, it is because the dream is
one of the clearest instances of those contents of the conscious,
whose basis eludes any plain and direct understanding. When anyone
knocks in a nail with a hammer, to hang something up, we can
understand every detail of the action. But it is otherwise with the
act of baptism, where every phase is problematic. We call these
actions, of which the meaning and the aim is not directly evident,
symbolic actions or symbols. On the basis of this reasoning, we call a
dream symbolic, as a dream is a psychological formation, of which the
origin, meaning and aim are obscure, inasmuch as it represents one of
the purest products of unconscious constellation. As Freud strikingly
says: “The dream is the via regia to the unconscious.” Besides the
dream, we can note many effects of unconscious constellation. We have
in the association-experiments a means for establishing exactly the
influence of the unconscious. We find those effects in the
disturbances of the experiment which I have called the “indicators of
the complex.” The task which the association-experiment gives to the
person experimented upon is so extraordinarily easy and simple that
even children can accomplish it without difficulty. It is, therefore,
very remarkable that so many disturbances of an intentional action
should be noted in this experiment. The only reasons or causes of
these disturbances which can usually be shown, are the partly
conscious, partly not-conscious constellations, caused by the
so-called complexes. In the greater number of these disturbances, we
can without difficulty establish the relation to images of emotional
complexes. We often need the psychoanalytic method to explain these
relations, that is, we have to ask the person experimented upon or the
patient, what associations he can give to the disturbed reactions. We
thus gain the historical matter which serves as a basis for our
judgment. The intelligent objection has already been made that the
person experimented upon could say what he liked, in other words, any
nonsense. This objection is made, I believe, in the unconscious
supposition that the historian who collects the matter for his
monograph is an idiot, incapable of distinguishing real parallels from
apparent ones and true documents from crude falsifications. The
professional man has means at his disposal by which clumsy mistakes
can be avoided with certainty, and the slighter ones very probably.
The mistrust of our opponents is here really delightful. For anyone
who understands psychoanalytic work it is a well-known fact that it is
not so very difficult to see where there is coherence, and where there
is none. Moreover, in the first place these fraudulent declarations
are very significant of the person experimented upon, and secondly, in
general rather easily to be recognized as fraudulent.

In association-experiments, we are able to recognize the very
intense effects produced by the unconscious in what are called
complex-interventions. These mistakes made in the association-experiment
are nothing but the prototypes of the mistakes made in everyday life,
which are for the greater part to be considered as interventions. Freud
brought together such material in his book, “The Psychopathology of
Everyday Life.”

These include the so-called symptomatic actions, which from another
point of view might equally as well be called “symbolic actions,” and
the real failures to carry out actions, such as forgetting, slips of
the tongue, etc. All these phenomena are the effect of unconscious
constellations and therefore so many entrance-gates into the domain of
the unconscious. When such errors are cumulative, they are designated
as neurosis, which, from this aspect, looks like a defective action
and therefore the effect of unconscious constellations or
complex-interventions.

The association-experiment is thus not directly a means to unlock the
unconscious, but rather a technique for obtaining a good selection of
defective reactions, which can then be used by psychoanalysis. At least,
this is its most reliable form of application at the present time. I
may, however, mention that it is possible that it may furnish other
especially valuable facts which would grant us some direct glimpses, but
I do not consider this problem sufficiently ripe to speak about.
Investigations in this direction are going on.

I hope that, through my explanation of our method, you may have gained
somewhat more confidence in its scientific character, so that you will
be by this time more inclined to agree that the phantasies which have
been hitherto discovered by means of psychoanalytic work are not merely
arbitrary suppositions and illusions of psychoanalysts. Perhaps you are
even inclined to listen patiently to what those products of unconscious
phantasies can tell us.

Footnote 9:

  Jahrbuch für psychopath. u. psychoanalyt. Forschungen, Bd. II, p. 465.




                              CHAPTER VII
                     The Content of the Unconscious


The phantasies of adults are, in so far as they are conscious, of great
diversity and strongly individual. It is therefore nearly impossible to
give a general description of them. But it is very different when we
enter by means of analysis into the world of his unconscious phantasies.
The diversities of the phantasies are indeed very great, but we do not
find those individual peculiarities which we find in the conscious self.
We meet here with more typical material which is not infrequently
repeated in a similar form in different people. Constantly recurring,
for instance, are ideas which are variations of the thoughts we
encounter in religion and mythology. This fact is so convincing that we
say we have discovered in these phantasies the same mechanisms which
once created mythological and religious ideas. I should have to enter
very much into detail in order to give you adequate examples. I must
refer you for these problems to my work, “Wandlungen und Symbole der
Libido.” I will only mention that, for instance, the central symbol of
Christianity—self-sacrifice—plays an important part in the phantasies of
the unconscious. The Viennese School describes this phenomenon by the
ambiguous term castration-complex. This paradoxical use of the term
follows from the particular attitude of this school toward the question
of unconscious sexuality. I have given special attention to the problem
in the book I have just mentioned; I must here restrict myself to this
incidental reference and hasten to say something about the origin of the
unconscious phantasy.

In the child’s unconsciousness, the phantasies are considerably
simplified, in relation to the proportions of the infantile
surroundings. Thanks to the united efforts of the psychoanalytic school,
we discovered that the most frequent phantasy of childhood is the
so-called _Œdipus-complex_. This designation also seems as paradoxical
as possible. We know that the tragic fate of Œdipus consisted in his
loving his mother and slaying his father. This conflict of later life
seems to be far remote from the child’s mind. To the uninitiated it
seems inconceivable that the child should have this conflict. After
careful reflection it will become clear that the tertium comparationis
consists just in this narrow limitation of the fate of Œdipus within the
bounds of the family. These limitations are very typical for the child,
for parents are never the boundary for the adult person to the same
extent. The Œdipus-complex represents an infantile conflict, but with
the exaggeration of the adult. The term Œdipus-complex does not mean,
naturally, that this conflict is considered as occurring in the adult
form, but in a corresponding form suitable to childhood. The little son
would like to have the mother all to himself and to be rid of the
father. As you know, little children can sometimes force themselves
between the parents in the most jealous way. The wishes and aims get, in
the unconscious, a more concrete and a more drastic form. Children are
small primitive people and are therefore quickly ready to kill. But as a
child is, in general, harmless, so his apparently dangerous wishes are,
as a rule, also harmless. I say “as a rule,” as you know that children,
too, sometimes give way to their impulses to murder, and this not always
in any indirect fashion. But just as the child, in general, is incapable
of making systematic projects, as little dangerous are his intentions to
murder. The same holds good of an Œdipus-view toward the mother. The
small traces of this phantasy in the conscious can easily be overlooked;
therefore nearly all parents are convinced that their children have no
Œdipus-complex. Parents as well as lovers are generally blind. If I now
say that the Œdipus-complex is in the first place only a formula for the
childish desire towards parents, and for the conflict which this craving
evokes, this statement of the situation will be more readily accepted.
The history of the Œdipus-phantasy is of special interest, as it teaches
us very much about the development of the unconscious phantasies.
Naturally, people think that the problem of Œdipus is the problem of the
son. But this is, astonishingly enough, only an illusion. Under some
circumstances the libido-sexualis reaches that definite differentiation
of puberty corresponding to the sex of the individual relatively late.
The libido sexualis has before this time an undifferentiated sexual
character, which can be also termed bisexual. Therefore it is not
astonishing if little girls possess the Œdipus-complex too. As far as I
can see, the first love of the child belongs to the mother, no matter
which its sex. If the love for the mother at this stage is intense, the
father is jealously kept away as a rival. Of course, for the child
itself, the mother has in this early stage of childhood no sexual
significance of any importance. The term “Œdipus-complex” is in so far
not really suitable. At this stage the mother has still the significance
of a protecting, enveloping, food-providing being, who, on this account,
is a source of delight. I do not identify, as I explained before, the
feeling of delight eo ipso with sexuality. In earliest childhood but a
slight amount of sexuality is connected with this feeling of delight.
But, nevertheless, jealousy can play a great part in it, as jealousy
does not belong entirely to the sphere of sexuality. The desire for food
has much to do with the first impulses of jealousy. Certainly, a
relatively germinating eroticism is also connected with it. This element
gradually increases as the years go on, so that the Œdipus-complex soon
assumes its classical form. In the case of the son, the conflict
develops in a more masculine and therefore more typical form, whilst in
the daughter, the typical affection for the father develops, with a
correspondingly jealous attitude toward the mother. We call this
complex, the _Electra-complex_. As everybody knows, Electra took revenge
on her mother for the murder of her husband, because that mother had
robbed her of her father.

Both phantasy-complexes develop with growing age, and reach a new stage
after puberty, when the emancipation from the parents is more or less
attained. The symbol of this time is the one already previously
mentioned; it is the symbol of self-sacrifice. The more the sexuality
develops the more the individual is forced to leave his family and to
acquire independence and autonomy. By its history, the child is closely
connected with its family and specially with its parents. In
consequence, it is often with the greatest difficulty that the child is
able to free itself from its infantile surroundings. The Œdipus- and
Electra-complex give rise to a conflict, if adults cannot succeed in
spiritually freeing themselves; hence arises the possibility of neurotic
disturbance. The libido, which is already sexually developed, takes
possession of the form given by the complex and produces feelings and
phantasies which unmistakably show the effective existence of the
complex, till then perfectly unconscious. The next consequence is the
formation of intense resistances against the immoral inner impulses
which are derived from the now active complexes. The conscious attitude
arising out of this can be of different kinds. Either the consequences
are direct, and then we notice in the son strong resistances against the
father and a typical affectionate and dependent attitude toward the
mother; or the consequences are indirect, that is to say, compensated,
and we notice, instead of the resistances toward the father, a typical
submissiveness here, and an irritated antagonistic attitude toward the
mother. It is possible that direct and compensated consequences take
place alternately. The same thing is to be said of the Electra-complex.
If the libido-sexualis were to cleave fast to these particular forms of
the conflict, murder and incest would be the consequence of the Œdipus
and Electra conflicts. These consequences are naturally not found among
normal people, and not even among amoral (“moral” here implying the
possession of a rationalized and codified moral system) primitive
persons, or humanity would have become extinct long ago. On the
contrary, it is in the natural order of things that what surrounds us
daily and has surrounded us, loses its compelling charm and thus forces
the libido to search for new objects, an important rule which prevents
parricide and inbreeding.

The further development of the libido toward objects outside the family
is the absolutely normal and right way of proceeding, and it is an
abnormal and morbid phenomenon if the libido remains, as it were, glued
to the family. Some indications of this phenomenon are nevertheless to
be noticed in normal people. A direct outcome of the infantile-complex
is the unconscious phantasy of self-sacrifice, which occurs after
puberty, in the succeeding stage of development. Of this I gave a
detailed example in my work, “Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido.” The
phantasy of self-sacrifice means sacrificing infantile wishes. I have
shown this in the work just mentioned and in the same place I have
referred to the parallels in the history of religions.


                   The Problems of the Incest-Complex


Freud has a special conception of the incest-complex which has given
rise to heated controversy. He starts from the fact that the
Œdipus-complex is generally unconscious, and conceives this as the
result of a repression of a moral kind. It is possible that I am not
expressing myself quite correctly, when I give you Freud’s view in these
words. At any rate, according to him the Œdipus-complex seems to be
repressed, that is, seems to be removed into the unconscious by a
reaction from the conscious tendencies. It almost looks as if the
Œdipus-complex would develop into consciousness if the development of
the child were to go on without restraint and if no cultural tendencies
influenced it. Freud calls this barrier, which prevents the
Œdipus-complex from ripening, the _incest-barrier_. He seems to believe,
so far as one can gather from his work, that the incest-barrier is the
result of experience, of the selective influence of reality, inasmuch as
the unconscious strives without restraint, and in an immediate way, for
its own satisfaction, without any consideration for others. This
conception is in harmony with the conception of Schopenhauer, who says
of the blind world-will that it is so egoistic that a man could slay his
brother merely to grease his boots with his brother’s fat. Freud
considers that the psychological incest-barrier, as postulated by him,
can be compared with the incest-taboo which we find among inferior
races. He further believes that these prohibitions are a proof of the
fact that men really desired incest, for which reason laws were framed
against it even in very primitive cultural stages. He takes the tendency
towards incest to be an absolute concrete sexual wish, lacking only the
quality of consciousness. He calls this complex the root-complex, or
nucleus, of the neuroses, and is inclined, viewing this as the original
one, to reduce nearly the whole psychology of the neuroses, as well as
many other phenomena in the world of mind, to this complex.




                              CHAPTER VIII
                      The Etiology of the Neuroses


With this conception of Freud’s we have to return to the question of the
etiology of the neuroses. We have seen that the psychoanalytic theory
began with a traumatic event in childhood, which was only later on found
to be a phantasy, at least in many cases. In consequence, the theory
became modified, and tried to find in the development of abnormal
phantasy the main etiological significance. The investigation of the
unconscious, made by the collaboration of many workers, carried on over
a space of ten years, provided an extensive empirical material, which
demonstrated that the incest-complex was the beginning of the morbid
phantasies. But it was no longer thought that the incest-complex was a
special complex of neurotic people. It was demonstrated to be a
constituent of a normal infantile psyche too. We cannot tell, by its
mere existence, if this complex will give rise to a neurosis or not. To
become pathogenic, it must give rise to a conflict; that is, the
complex, which in itself is harmless, has to become dynamic, and thus
give rise to a conflict.

Herewith, we come to a new and important question. The whole etiological
problem is altered, if the infantile “root-complex” is only a general
form, which is not pathogenic in itself, and requires, as we saw in our
previous exposition, to be subsequently set in action. Under these
circumstances, we dig in vain among the reminiscences of earliest
childhood, as they give us only the general forms of the later
conflicts, but not the conflict itself.

I believe the best thing I can do is to describe the further development
of the theory by demonstrating the case of that young lady whose story
you have heard in part in one of the former lectures. You will probably
remember that the shying of the horses, by means of the anamnestic
explanation, brought back the reminiscence of a comparable scene in
childhood. We here discussed the trauma theory. We found that we had to
look for the real pathological element in the exaggerated phantasy,
which took its origin in a certain retardation of the psychic sexual
development. We have now to apply our theoretical standpoint to the
origin of this particular type of illness, so that we may understand
how, just at that moment, this event of her childhood, which seemed to
be of such potency, could come to constellation.

The simplest way to come to an understanding of this important event
would be by making an exact inquiry into the circumstances of the
moment. The first thing I did was to question the patient about the
society in which she had been at that time, and as to what was the
farewell gathering to which she had been just before. She had been at a
farewell supper, given in honor of her best friend, who was going to a
foreign health-resort for a nervous illness. We hear that this friend is
happily married, and is the mother of one child. We have some right to
doubt this assertion of her happiness. If she were really happily
married, she probably would not be nervous and would not need a cure.
When I put my question differently, I learned that my patient had been
brought back into the host’s house as soon as she was overtaken by her
friends, as this house was the nearest place to bring her to in safety.
In her exhausted condition she received his hospitality. As the patient
came to this part of her history she suddenly broke off, was
embarrassed, fidgetted and tried to turn to another subject. Evidently
we had now come upon some disagreeable reminiscences, which suddenly
presented themselves. After the patient had overcome obstinate
resistances, it was admitted that something very remarkable had happened
that night. The host made her a passionate declaration of love, thus
giving rise to a situation that might well be considered difficult and
painful, considering the absence of the hostess. Ostensibly this
declaration came like a flash of lightning from a clear sky. A small
dose of criticism applied to this assertion will teach us that these
things never drop from the clouds, but have always their previous
history. It was the work of the following weeks to dig out piecemeal a
whole, long love-story.

I can thus roughly describe the picture I got at finally. As a child the
patient was thoroughly boyish, loved only turbulent games for boys,
laughed at her own sex, and flung aside all feminine ways and
occupations. After puberty, the time when the sex-question should have
come nearer to her, she began to shun all society; she hated and
despised, as it were, everything which could remind her even remotely of
the biological destination of mankind, and lived in a world of
phantasies which had nothing in common with the rude reality. So she
escaped, up to her twenty-fourth year, all the little adventures, hopes
and expectations which ordinarily move a woman of this age. (In this
respect women are very often remarkably insincere towards themselves and
towards the physician.) But she became acquainted with two men who were
destined to destroy the thorny hedge which had grown all around her. Mr.
A. was the husband of her best friend at the time; Mr. B. was the
bachelor-friend of this family. Both were to her taste. It seemed to her
pretty soon that Mr. B. was much more sympathetic to her, and from this
resulted a more intimate relationship between herself and him, and the
possibility of an engagement was discussed. Through her relations with
Mr. B., and through her friend, she met Mr. A. frequently. In an
inexplicable way his presence very often excited her and made her
nervous. Just at this time our friend went to a big party. All her
friends were there. She became lost in thought, and played as in a dream
with her ring, which suddenly slipped from her hand and rolled under the
table. Both men tried to find it, and Mr. B. managed to get it. With an
expressive smile he put the ring back on her finger and said: “You know
what this means?” At that moment a strange and irresistible feeling came
over her, she tore the ring from her finger and threw it out of the open
window. Evidently a painful moment ensued, and she soon left the
company, feeling deeply depressed. A short time later she found herself,
for her holidays, accidentally in the same health-resort where Mr. A.
and his wife were staying. Mrs. A. now became more and more nervous,
and, as she felt ill, had to stay frequently at home. The patient often
went out with Mr. A. alone. One day they were out in a small boat. She
was boisterously merry, and suddenly fell overboard. Mr. A. saved her
with great difficulty, and lifted her, half unconscious, into the boat.
He then kissed her. With this romantic event the bonds were woven fast.
To defend herself, our patient tried energetically to get herself
engaged to Mr. B., and to imagine that she loved him. Of course this
queer play did not escape the sharp eye of feminine jealousy. Mrs. A.,
her friend, felt the secret, was worried by it, and her nervousness grew
proportionately. It became more and more necessary for her to go to a
foreign health-resort. The farewell-party was a dangerous opportunity.
The patient knew that her friend and rival was going off the same
evening, so Mr. A. would be alone. Certainly she did not see this
opportunity clearly, as women have the notable capacity “to think”
purely emotionally, and not intellectually. For this reason, it seems to
them as if they never thought about certain matters at all, but as a
matter of fact she had a queer feeling all the evening. She felt
extremely nervous, and when Mrs. A. had been accompanied to the station
and had gone, the hysterical attack occurred on her way back. I asked
her of what she had been thinking, or what she felt at the actual moment
when the trotting horses came along. Her answer was, she had only a
frightful feeling, the feeling that something dreadful was very near to
her, which she could not escape. As you know, the consequence was that
the exhausted patient was brought back into the house of the host, Mr.
A. A simple human mind would understand the situation without
difficulty. An uninitiated person would say: “Well, that is clear
enough, she only intended to return by one way or another to Mr. A.’s
house,” but the psychologist would reproach this layman for his
incorrect way of expressing himself, and would tell him that the patient
was not conscious of the motives of her behavior, and that it was,
therefore, not permissible to speak of the patient’s intention to return
to Mr. A.’s house.

There are, of course, learned psychologists who are capable of
furnishing many theoretical reasons for disputing the meaning of this
behavior. They base their reasons on the dogma of the identity of
consciousness and psyche. The psychology inaugurated by Freud recognized
long ago that it is impossible to estimate psychological actions as to
their final meaning by conscious motives, but that the objective
standard of their psychological results has to be applied for their
right evaluation. Now-a-days it cannot be contested any longer that
there are unconscious tendencies too, which have a great influence on
our modes of reaction, and on the effects to which these in turn give
rise. What happened in Mr. A.’s house bears out this observation; our
patient made a sentimental scene, and Mr. A. was induced to answer it
with a declaration of love. Looked at in the light of this last event,
the whole previous history seems to be very ingeniously directed towards
just this end, but throughout the conscience of the patient struggled
consciously against it. Our theoretical profit from this story is the
clear perception that an unconscious purpose or tendency has brought on
to the stage the scene of the fright from the horses, utilizing thus
very possibly that infantile reminiscence, where the shying horses
galloped towards the catastrophe. Reviewing the whole material, the
scene with the horses—the starting point of the illness—seems now to be
the keystone of a planned edifice. The fright, and the apparent
traumatic effect of the event in childhood, are only brought on the
stage in the peculiar way characteristic of hysteria. But what is thus
put on the stage has become almost a reality. We know from hundreds of
experiences that certain hysterical pains are only put on the stage in
order to reap certain advantages from the sufferer’s surroundings. The
patients not only believe that they suffer, but their sufferings are,
from a psychological standpoint, as real as those due to organic causes;
nevertheless, they are but stage-effects.


                        The Regression of Libido


This utilization of reminiscences to put on the stage any illness, or an
apparent etiology, is called a _regression of the libido_. The libido
goes back to reminiscences, and makes them actual, so that an apparent
etiology is produced. In this case, by the old theory, the fright from
the horses would seem to be based on a former shock. The resemblance
between the two scenes is unmistakable, and in both cases the patient’s
fright is absolutely real. At any rate, we have no reason to doubt her
assertions in this respect, as they are in full harmony with all other
experiences. The nervous asthma, the hysterical anxiety, the psychogenic
depressions and exaltations, the pains, the convulsions—they are all
very real, and that physician who has himself suffered from a
psychogenic symptom knows that it feels absolutely real. Regressively
re-lived reminiscences, even if they were but phantasies, are as real as
remembrances of events that have once been real.

As the term “regression of libido” shows, we understand by this
retrograde mode of application of the libido, a retreat of the libido to
former stages. In our example, we are able to recognize clearly the way
the process of regression is carried on. At that farewell party, which
proved a good opportunity to be alone with the host, the patient shrank
from the idea of turning this opportunity to her advantage, and yet was
overpowered by her desires, which she had never consciously realized up
to that moment. The libido was not used consciously for that definite
purpose, nor was this purpose ever acknowledged. The libido had to carry
it out through the unconscious, and through the pretext of the fright
caused by an apparently terrible danger. Her feeling at the moment when
the horses approached illustrates our formula most clearly; she felt as
if something inevitable had now to happen.

The process of regression is beautifully demonstrated in an illustration
already used by Freud. The libido can be compared with a stream which is
dammed up as soon as its course meets any impediment, whence arises an
inundation. If this stream has previously, in its upper reaches,
excavated other channels, then these channels will be filled up again by
reason of the damming below. To a certain extent they would appear to be
real river beds, filled with water as before, but at the same time, they
only have a temporary existence. It is not that the stream has
permanently chosen the old channels, but only for as long as the
impediment endures in the main stream. The affluents do not always carry
water, because they were from the first, as it were, not independent
streams, but only former stages of development of the main river, or
passing possibilities, to which an inundation has given the opportunity
for fresh existence. This illustration can directly be transferred to
the development of the application of the libido. The definite
direction, the main river, is not yet found during the childish
development of sexuality. The libido goes instead into all possible
by-paths, and only gradually does the definite form develop. But the
more the stream follows out its main channel, the more the affluents
will dry up and lose their importance, leaving only traces of former
activity. Similarly, the importance of the childish precursors of
sexuality disappears completely as a rule, only leaving behind certain
traces.

If in later life an impediment arises, so that the damming of the libido
reanimates the old by-paths, the condition thus excited is properly a
new one, and something abnormal.

The former condition of the child is normal usage of the libido, whilst
the return of the libido towards the childish past is something
abnormal. Therefore, in my opinion, it is an erroneous terminology to
call the infantile sexual manifestations “perversions,” for it is not
permissible to give normal manifestations pathological terms. This
erroneous usage seems to be responsible for the confusion of the
scientific public. The terms employed in neurotic psychology have been
misapplied here, under the assumption that the abnormal by-paths of the
libido discovered in neurotic people are the same phenomena as are to be
found in children.


                    The Infantile Amnesia Criticized


The so-called _amnesia of childhood_, which plays an important part in
the “Three Contributions,” is a similar illegitimate retrograde
application from pathology. Amnesia is a pathological condition,
consisting in the repression of certain contents of the conscious. This
condition cannot possibly be the same as the antegrade amnesia of
children, which consists in an incapacity for intentional reproduction,
a condition we find also among savages. This incapacity for reproduction
dates from birth, and can be understood on obvious anatomical and
biological grounds. It would be a strange hypothesis were we willing to
regard this totally different quality of early infantile consciousness
as one to be attributed to repression, in analogy with the condition in
neurosis. The amnesia of neurosis is punched out, as it were, from the
continuity of memory, but the remembrances of earlier childhood exist in
separate islands in the continuity of the non-memory. This condition is
the opposite in every sense of the condition of neurosis, so that the
expression “amnesia,” generally used for this condition, is incorrect.
The “amnesia of childhood” is a conclusion _a posteriori_ from the
psychology of neurosis, just as is the “polymorphic perverse”
disposition of the child.


                  The Latent Sexual Period Criticized


This error in the theoretical conception is shown clearly in the
so-called _latent sexual period of childhood_. Freud has remarked that
the early infantile so-called sexual manifestations, which I now call
the phenomena of the pre-sexual stage, vanish after a while, and only
reappear much later. Everything that Freud has termed the “suckling’s
masturbation,” that is to say, all those sexual-like actions of which we
spoke before, are said to return later as real onanism. Such a process
of development would be biologically unique. In conformity with this
theory one would have to say, for instance, that when a plant forms a
bud, from which a blossom begins to unfold, the blossom is taken back
again before it is fully developed, and is again hidden within the bud,
to reappear later on in the same form. This impossible supposition is a
consequence of the assertion that the early infantile activities of the
pre-sexual stage are sexual phenomena, and that those manifestations,
which resemble masturbation, are genuinely acts of masturbation. In this
way Freud had to assert that there is a disappearance of sexuality, or,
as he calls it, a _latent sexual period_. What he calls a disappearance
of sexuality is nothing but the _real beginning of sexuality_,
everything preceding was but the fore-stage to which no real sexual
character can be imputed. In this way, the impossible phenomenon of the
latent period is very simply explained. This theory of the latent sexual
period is a striking instance of the incorrectness of the conception of
the early infantile sexuality. But there has been no error of
observation. On the contrary, the hypothesis of the latent sexual period
proves how exactly Freud noticed the apparent recommencement of
sexuality. The error lies in the conception. As we saw before, the first
mistake consists in a somewhat old-fashioned conception of the
multiplicity of instincts. If we accept the idea of two or more
instincts existing side by side, we must naturally conclude that, if one
instinct has not yet become manifest, it is present in nuce in
accordance with the theory of pre-formation. In the physical sphere we
should perhaps have to say that, when a piece of iron passes from the
condition of heat to the condition of light, the light was already
existent in nuce (latent) in the heat. Such assumptions are arbitrary
projections of human ideas into transcendental regions, contravening the
prescription of the theory of cognition.

We have thus no right to speak of a sexual instinct existing in nuce, as
we then give an arbitrary explanation of phenomena which can be
explained otherwise, and in a more adequate manner. We can speak of the
manifestations of a nutrition instinct, of the manifestations of a
sexual instinct, etc., but we have only the right to do so when the
function has quite clearly reached the surface. We only speak of light
when the iron is visibly luminous, but not when the iron is merely hot.
Freud, as an observer, sees clearly that the sexuality of neurotic
people is not entirely comparable with infantile sexuality, for there is
a great difference, for instance, between the uncleanliness of a child
of two years old and the uncleanliness of a katatonic patient of forty.
The former is a psychological and normal phenomenon; the latter is
extraordinarily pathological. Freud inserted a short passage in his
“Three Contributions” saying that the infantile form of neurotic
sexuality is either wholly, or at any rate partly, due to a regression.
That is, even in those cases where we might say, these are still the
same by-paths, we find that the function of the by-paths is still
increased by regression. Freud thus recognizes that the infantile
sexuality of neurotic people is _for the greater part_ a regressive
phenomenon. That this must be so is also shown through the further
insight obtained from the investigations of recent years, that the
observations concerning the psychology of the childhood of neurotic
people hold equally good for normal people. At any rate we can say that
the history of the development of infantile sexuality in persons with
neurosis differs but by a hair’s breadth from that of normal beings who
have escaped the attention of the expert appraiser. Striking differences
are exceptional.


              Further Remarks on the Etiology of Neurosis


The more we penetrate into the heart of infantile development, the more
we receive the impression that as little can be found there of
etiological significance, as in the infantile shock. Even with the
acutest ferreting into history, we shall never discover why people
living on German soil had just such a fate, and why the Gauls another.
The further we get away, in analytical investigations from the epoch of
the manifest neurosis, the less can we expect to find the real motive of
the neurosis, since the dynamic disproportions grow fainter and fainter
the further we go back into the past. In constructing our theory so as
to deduce the neurosis from causes in the distant past, we are first and
foremost obeying the impulse of our patients to withdraw themselves as
far as possible from the critical present. The pathogenic conflict
exists _only in the present moment_. It is just as if a nation wanted to
regard its miserable political conditions at the actual moment as due to
the past; as if the Germany of the 19th century had attributed its
political dismemberment and incapacity to its suppression by the Romans,
instead of having sought the actual sources of her difficulties in the
present. _Only_ in the _actual present_ are the effective causes, and
only here are the possibilities of removing them.


           The Etiological Significance of the Actual Present


A greater part of the psychoanalytic school is under the spell of the
conception that the conflicts of childhood are conditio sine qua non for
the neuroses. It is not only the theorist, who studies the psychology of
childhood from scientific interest, but the practical man also, who
believes that he has to turn the history of infancy inside out to find
there the dynamic source of the actual neurosis—it were a fruitless
enterprise if done under this presumption. In the meantime, the most
important factor escapes the analyst, namely, the conflict and the
claims of the present time. In the case before us, we should not
understand any of the motives which produced the hysterical attacks if
we looked for them in earliest childhood. It is the form alone which
those reminiscences determine to a large extent, but the dynamic
originates from the present time. The insight into the actual meaning of
these motives is real understanding.

We can now understand why that moment was pathogenic, as well as why it
chose those particular symbols. Through the conception of regression,
the theory is freed from the narrow formula of the importance of the
events in childhood, and the actual conflict thus gets that significance
which, from an empirical standpoint, belongs to it implicitly. Freud
himself introduced the conception of regression in his “Three
Contributions,” acknowledging rightly that our observations do not
permit us to seek the cause of neurosis exclusively in the past. If it
is true, then, that reminiscent matter becomes active again as a rule by
regression, we have to consider the following question: Have, perhaps,
the apparent effective results of reminiscences to be referred in
general to a regression of the libido? As I said before, Freud suggested
in his “Three Contributions,” that the infantilism of neurotic sexuality
was, _for the greater part, due to the regression of the libido_. This
statement deserves greater prominence than it there received. Freud did
give it this prominence in his later works to a somewhat greater extent.

The recognition of the regression of the libido very largely reduces the
etiological significance of the events of childhood. It has already
seemed to us rather astonishing that the Œdipus- or the Electra-complex
should have a determining value in regard to the onset of a neurosis,
since these complexes exist in everyone. They exist even with those
persons who have never known their own father and mother, but have been
educated by their step-parents. I have analyzed cases of this kind, and
found that the incest-complex was as well developed as in other
patients. It seems to us that this is good proof that the incest-complex
is much more a purely regressive production of phantasies than a
reality. From this standpoint, the events in childhood are only
significant for the neuroses in so far as they are revived later through
a regression of the libido. That this must be true to a great extent is
also shown by the fact that the infantile sexual shock never causes
hysteria, nor does the incest-complex, which is common to everyone. The
neurosis only begins as soon as the incest-complex becomes actuated by
regression.

So we come to the question, why does the libido make a regression? To
answer it we must study carefully under what circumstances regression
arises. In treating this problem with my patients, I generally give the
following example: While a mountain climber is attempting the ascent of
a certain peak, he happens to meet with an insurmountable obstacle, let
us say, some precipitous rocky wall which cannot be surmounted. After
having vainly sought for another path, he will have to return and
regretfully abandon the climbing of that peak. He will say to himself:
“It is not in my power to surmount this difficulty, so I will climb
another easier mountain.” In this case, we find there is a normal
utilization of the libido. The man returns, when he finds an
insurmountable difficulty, and uses his libido, which could not attain
its original aim, for the ascent of another mountain. Now let us imagine
that this rocky wall was not really unclimbable so far as his physique
was concerned, but that from mere nervousness he withdrew from this
somewhat difficult enterprise. In this case, there are two
possibilities: I. The man will be annoyed by his own cowardice, and will
wish to prove himself less timid on another occasion, or perhaps will
even admit that with his timidity he ought never to undertake such a
difficult ascent. At any rate, he will acknowledge that he has not
sufficient moral capacity for these difficulties. He therefore uses that
libido, which did not attain its original aim, for a useful
self-criticism, and for sketching a plan by which he may be able, with
due regard to his moral capacity, to realize his wish to climb. II. The
possibility is, that the man does not realize his own cowardice, and
declares off-hand that this mountain is physically unattainable,
although he is quite able to see that, with sufficient courage, the
obstacle could have been overcome. But he prefers to deceive himself.
Thus the psychological situation which is of importance for our problem
is created.


         The Etiological Significance of Failure of Adaptation


Probably this man knows very well that it would have been physically
possible to overcome the difficulty, that he was only morally incapable
of doing so. He rejects this idea on account of its painful nature. He
is so conceited that he cannot admit to himself his cowardice. He brags
of his courage and prefers to declare things impossible rather than his
own courage inadequate. But through this behavior he comes into
opposition with his own self: on the one hand he has a right view of the
situation, on the other he hides this knowledge from himself, behind the
illusion of his infallible courage. He represses the proper view, and
forcibly tries to impress his subjective, illusive opinion upon reality.
The result of this contradiction is that the libido is divided, and that
the two parts are directed against one another. He opposes his wish to
climb a mountain by his artificial self-created opinion, that its ascent
is impossible. He does not turn to the real impossibility, but to an
artificial one, to a self-given limitation; thus he is in disharmony
with himself, and from this moment has an internal conflict. Now insight
into his cowardice will get the upper hand; now obstinacy and pride. In
either case the libido is engaged in a useless civil war. Thus the man
becomes incapable of any enterprise. He will never realize his wish to
climb a mountain, and he goes perfectly astray as to his moral
qualities. He is therefore less capable of performing his work, he is
not fully adapted, he can be compared to a neurotic patient. The libido
which withdrew from before this difficulty has neither led to honest
self-criticism, nor to a desperate struggle to overcome the obstacle; it
has only been used to maintain his cheap pretence that the ascent was
really impossible, even heroic courage could have availed nothing. Such
a reaction is called an _infantile reaction_. It is very characteristic
of children, and of naïve minds, not to find the fault in their own
shortcomings, but in external circumstances, and to impute to these
their own subjective judgment. This man solves his problem in an
infantile way, that is, he replaces the suitable mode of adaptation of
our former case by a mode of adaptation belonging to the infantile mind.
This is regression. His libido withdraws from an obstacle which cannot
be surmounted, and replaces a real action by an infantile illusion.
These cases are very commonly met with in practice among neurotics. I
will remind you here of those well-known cases in which young girls
become hysterical with curious suddenness just when they are called upon
to decide about their engagements. As an instance, I should like to
describe to you the case of two sisters, separated only by one year in
age. They were similar in capacities and characters; their education was
the same; they grew up in the same surroundings, and under the influence
of their parents. Both were healthy; neither the one nor the other
showed any nervous symptoms. An attentive observer might have discovered
that the elder daughter was the more beloved by the parents. This
affection depended on a certain sensitiveness which this daughter
showed. She asked for more affection than the younger one, was also
somewhat precocious and more serious. Besides, she showed some charming
childish traits, just those things which, through their slightly
capricious and unbalanced character, make a personality especially
charming. No wonder that father and mother had a great joy in their
elder daughter. As both sisters became of marriageable age, almost at
the same time they became intimately acquainted with two young men, and
the possibility of their marriages soon approached. As is generally the
case, certain difficulties existed. Both girls were young and had very
little experience of the world. Both men were relatively young too, and
in positions which might have been better; they were only at the
beginning of a career, but nevertheless, both were capable young men.
Both girls lived in a social atmosphere which gave them the right to
certain social expectations. It was a situation in which a certain doubt
as to the suitability of either marriage was permissible. Moreover, both
girls were insufficiently acquainted with their prospective husbands,
and were therefore not quite sure of their love. There were many
hesitations and doubts. Here it was noticed that the elder girl always
showed greater waverings in her decisions. From these hesitations some
painful moments arose between the girls and the young men, who naturally
longed for more certainty. At such moments the elder sister was much
more excited than the younger one. Several times she went weeping to her
mother, complaining of her own hesitation. The younger one was somewhat
more decided, and put an end to the unsettled situation by accepting her
suitor. She thus got over her difficulty and the further events ran
smoothly. As soon as the admirer of the elder sister became aware that
the younger one had put matters on a surer footing, he rushed to his
lady and begged in a somewhat passionate way for her acceptance. His
passion irritated and frightened her a little, although she was really
inclined to follow her sister’s example. She answered in a somewhat
haughty and offhand way. He replied with sharp reproaches, causing her
to get still more excited. The end was a scene with tears, and he went
away in an angry mood. At home, he told the story to his mother, who
expressed the opinion that this girl was really unsuitable for him, and
that it would be perhaps better to choose some one else. The girl, for
her part, doubted very much if she really loved this man. It suddenly
seemed to her impossible to follow him to an unknown destiny, and to be
obliged to leave her beloved parents. From that moment, she was
depressed; she showed unmistakable signs of the greatest jealousy
towards her sister, but would neither see nor admit that she was
jealous. The former affectionate relations with her parents changed
also. Instead of her earlier childlike affection, she betrayed a
lamentable state of mind, which increased sometimes to pronounced
irritability; weeks of depression ensued. Whilst the younger sister
celebrated her wedding, the elder went to a distant health-resort for a
nervous intestinal trouble. I shall not continue the history of the
disease; it ended in an ordinary hysteria.

In analyzing this case, great resistance to the sexual problem was
found. The resistance depended on many perverse phantasies, the
existence of which would not be admitted by the patient. The question,
whence arose such perverse phantasies, so unexpected in a young girl,
brought us to the discovery that once as a child, eight years old, she
had found herself suddenly confronted in the street by an exhibitionist.
She was rooted to the spot by fright, and even much later ugly images
persecuted her in her dreams. Her younger sister was with her at the
time. The night after the patient told me this, she dreamed of a man in
a gray suit, who seemed about to do in front of her what the
exhibitionist had done. She awoke with a cry of terror. The first
association to the gray suit was a suit of her father’s, which he had
been wearing on an excursion which she made with him when she was about
six years old. This dream connects the father, without any doubt, with
the exhibitionist. This must be done for some reason. Did something
happen with the father, which could possibly call forth this
association? This problem met with great resistance from the patient.
But she could not get rid of it. At the next sitting she reproduced some
early reminiscences, when she had noticed her father undressing himself.
Again, she came one day excited and terribly shaken, and told me that
she had had an abominable vision, absolutely distinct. In bed at night,
she felt herself again a child of two or three years old, and she saw
her father standing by her bed in an obscene attitude. The story was
gasped out piece by piece, obviously with the greatest internal
struggle. This was followed by violent reproaches, of how dreadful it is
that a father should ever behave to his child in such a terrible manner.

Nothing is less probable than that the father really did this. It is
only a phantasy, probably first constructed in the course of the
analysis from that same need of discovering a cause which once induced
the physician to form the theory that hysteria was only caused by such
impressions. This case seemed to me suitable to demonstrate the meaning
of the theory of regression, and to show at the same time the source of
the theoretical mistakes so far. We saw that both sisters were
originally only slightly different. From the moment of the engagement
their ways were totally separated. They seemed now to have quite
different characters. The one, vigorous in health, and enjoying life,
was a good and courageous woman, willing to undertake the natural
demands of life; the other was sad, ill-tempered, full of bitterness and
malice, disinclined to make any effort towards a reasonable life,
egotistical, quibbling, and a nuisance to all about her. This striking
difference was only brought out when the one sister happily passed
through the difficulties of her engagement, whilst the other did not.
For both, it hung to a certain extent only on a hair, whether the affair
would be broken off or not. The younger one, somewhat calmer, was
therefore more deliberate, and able to find the right word at the right
moment. The elder one was more spoiled and more sensitive, consequently
more influenced by her emotions, and could not find the right word, nor
had she the courage to sacrifice her pride to put things straight
afterwards. This little circumstance had a very important effect.
Originally the conditions were much the same for both sisters. The
greater sensitiveness of the elder produced the difference. The question
now is: Whence arose this sensitiveness with its unfortunate results?
The analysis demonstrated the existence of an extraordinarily developed
sexuality of infantile phantastic character; in addition, an incestuous
phantasy towards the father. We have a quick and easy solution of the
problem of this sensitiveness, if we admit that these phantasies had a
lively, and therefore effective existence. We might thus readily
understand why this girl was so sensitive. She was shut up in her own
phantasies and strongly attached to her father. Under these
circumstances, it would have been really a wonder had she been willing
to love and marry another man. The more we pursue our need for a
causation, and pursue the development of these phantasies back to their
beginning, the greater grow the difficulties of the analysis, that is to
say, the resistances as we call them. At the end we should find that
impressive scene, that obscene act, whose improbability has already been
established. This scene has exactly the character of a subsequent
phantastic formation. Therefore, we have to conceive these difficulties,
which we called “resistances,” at least in this part of the analysis, as
an opposition of the patient against the formation of such phantasies,
and not as a resistance against the conscious admittance of a painful
remembrance.

You will ask with astonishment, to what aim the patient contrives such a
phantasy? You will even be inclined to suggest that the physician forced
the patient to invent it, otherwise she would probably never have
produced such an absurd idea. I do not venture to doubt that there have
been cases in which, by dint of the physician’s desire to find a cause,
especially under the influence of the shock-theory, the patient has been
brought to contrive such phantasies. But the physician would never have
come to this theory, had he not followed the patient’s line of thought,
thus taking part in this retrograde movement of the libido which we call
regression. The physician, consequently, only carried right through to
its consequence what the patient was afraid to carry out, namely, a
regression, a falling back of the libido to its former desires. The
analysis, in following the libido-regression, does not always follow the
exact way marked by its historical development, but very often rather a
later phantasy, which only partly depends on former realities. In our
case, only some of the circumstances are real, and it is but much later
that they get their great importance, namely, at the moment when the
libido regresses. Wherever the libido takes hold of a reminiscence, we
may expect that this reminiscence will be elaborated and altered, as
everything that is touched by the libido revives, takes on dramatic
form, and becomes systematized. We have to admit that, in our case,
almost the greater part of these phantasies became significant
subsequently, after the libido had made a regression, after it had taken
hold of everything that could be suitable, and had made out of all this
a phantasy. Then that phantasy, keeping pace with the retrograde
movement of the libido, came back at last to the father and put upon him
all the infantile sexual desires. Even so it was thought in ancient
times that the golden age of Paradise lay in the past! In the case
before us we know that all the phantasies brought out by analysis did
become subsequently of importance. From this standpoint only, we are not
able to explain the beginning of the neurosis; we should constantly move
in a circle. The critical moment for this neurosis was that in which the
girl and man were inclined to love one another, but in which an
inopportune sensitiveness on the part of the patient caused the
opportunity to slip by.

_The Conception of Sensitiveness._—We might say, and the
psychoanalytical conception inclines in this direction, that this
critical sensitiveness arises from some peculiar psychological personal
history, which determined this end. We know that such sensitiveness in a
psychogenic neurosis is always a symptom of a discord within the
subject’s self, a symptom of a struggle between two divergent
tendencies. Both tendencies have their own previous psychological story.
In this case, we are able to show that this special resistance, the
content of that critical sensitiveness, is, as a matter of fact,
connected in the patient’s previous history, with certain infantile
sexual manifestations, and also with that so-called traumatic event—all
things which are capable of casting a shadow on sexuality. This would be
so far plausible if the sister of the patient had not lived more or less
the same life, without experiencing all these consequences. I mean, she
did not develop a neurosis. So we have to agree that the patient
experienced these things in a special way, perhaps more intensely than
the younger one. Perhaps also, the events of her earlier childhood were
to her of a disproportionate importance. But if it had been the case to
such a marked extent, something of it would surely have been noticed
earlier. In later youth, the earlier events of childhood were as much
forgotten by the patient as by her sister. Another supposition is
therefore possible. This critical sensitiveness is not the consequence
of the special previous past history, but springs from something that
had existed all along. A careful observer of small children can notice,
even in early infancy, any unusual sensitiveness. I once analyzed a
hysterical patient who showed me a letter written by her mother when
this patient was two and a half years old. Her mother wrote about her
and her sister. The elder was always good-tempered and enterprising, but
the other was always in difficulties with both people and things. The
first one became in later life hysterical, the other one katatonic.
These far-reaching differences, which go back into earliest childhood,
cannot depend on the more or less accidental events of life, but have to
be considered as being innate differences. From this point of view, we
cannot any longer pretend that her special previous psychological
history caused this sensitiveness at that critical moment; it would be
more correct to say: This innate sensitiveness is manifested most
distinctly in uncommon situations.

This surplus of sensitiveness is found very often as an enrichment of a
personality contributing even more to the charm of the character than to
its detriment. But in difficult and uncommon situations the advantage
very often turns into a disadvantage, as the inopportunely excited
emotion renders calm consideration impossible. Nothing could be more
incorrect than to consider this sensitiveness as eo ipso a morbid
constituent of a character. If it really were so, we should have to
regard at least one third of humanity as pathological. Only if the
consequences of this sensitiveness are destructive to the individual
have we a right to consider this quality as abnormal.

_Primary Sensitiveness and Regression._—We come to this difficulty when
we crudely oppose the two conceptions as to the significance of the
previous psychological history as we have done here; in reality, the two
are not mutually exclusive. A certain innate sensitiveness leads to a
special psychological history, to special reactions to infantile events,
which are not without their own influence on the development of the
childish conception of life. Events bound up with powerful impressions
can never pass without leaving some trace on sensitive people. Some of
these often remain effective throughout life, and such events can exert
an apparently determining influence on the whole mental development.
Dirty and disillusional experiences in the domain of sexuality are
specially apt to frighten a sensitive person for years and years. Under
these conditions, the mere thought of sexuality raises the greatest
resistances. As the creation of the shock-theory proved, we are too much
inclined, in consequence of our knowledge of such cases, to attribute
the emotional development of a person more or less to accidents. The
earlier shock-theory went too far in this respect. We must never forget
that _the world is, in the first place, a subjective phenomenon. The
impressions we receive from these happenings are also our own doing._ It
is not the case that the impressions are forced on us unconditionally,
but our disposition gives the value to the impressions. A man with
stored-up libido will as a rule have quite different impressions, much
more vivid impressions, than one who organizes his libido into a rich
activity. Such a sensitive person will have a more profound impression
from certain events which might harmlessly pass over a less sensitive
subject. Therefore, in conjunction with the accidental impression, we
have to consider seriously the subjective conditions. Our former
considerations, and the observation of the concrete case especially,
show us that the important subjective condition is the regression. It is
shown by experience in practice, that the effect of regression is so
enormous, so important and so impressive, that we might perhaps be
inclined to attribute the effect of accidental events to the mechanism
of regression only. Without any doubt, there are cases in which
everything is dramatized, where even the traumatic events are artefacts
of the imagination, and in which the few real events are subsequently
entirely distorted through phantastic elaboration. We can simply say,
that there is not a single case of neurosis, in which the emotional
value of the preceding event is not considerably aggravated through the
regression of libido, and even where great parts of the infantile
development seem to be of extraordinary importance, they only gain this
through regression.

As is always the case, truth is found in the middle. The previous
history has certainly a determining historic value, which is reinforced
by the regression. Sometimes the traumatic significance of the previous
history comes more into the foreground; sometimes only the regressive
meaning. These observations have naturally to be applied to the
infantile sexual events too. Obviously there are cases in which brutal
sexual accidents justify the shadow thrown on sexuality, and explain
thoroughly the later resistance of the individual towards sexuality.
Dreadful impressions other than sexual can also sometimes leave behind a
permanent feeling of insecurity, which may determine the individual in a
hesitating attitude towards reality. Where real events of undoubted
traumatic potentiality are wanting—as is generally the case with
neurosis—there the mechanism of regression prevails. Of course, you
could object that we have no criterion for the potential effect of the
trauma or shock, as this is a highly relative conception. It is not
quite so; we have in the standard of the average normal a criterion for
the potential effect of a shock. Whatever is capable of making a strong
and persistent impression upon a normal person must be considered as
having a determining influence for neurotics also. But we may not
straightway attribute any importance, even in neurosis, to impressions
which in a normal case would disappear and be forgotten. In most of the
cases where any event has an unexpected traumatic influence, we shall
find in all probability a regression, that is to say, a secondary
phantastic dramatization. The earlier in childhood an impression is said
to have arisen, the more suspicious is its reality. Animals and
primitive people have not that readiness in reproducing memories from a
single impression which we find among civilized people. Very young
children have by no means that impressionability which we find in older
children. A certain higher development of the mental faculties is a
necessary condition for impressionability. Therefore we may agree that
the earlier a patient places some significant event in his childhood,
the more likely it will be a phantastic and regressive one. Important
impressions are only to be expected from later youth. At any rate, we
have generally to attribute to the events of earliest childhood, that
is, from the fifth year backwards, but a regressive importance.
Sometimes the regression does play an overwhelming part in later years,
but even then one must not ascribe too little importance to accidental
experiences. It is well known that, in the later course of a neurosis,
the accidental events and the regression together form a vicious circle.
The withdrawal from the experiences of life leads to regression, and the
regression aggravates the resistances towards life.

In the conception of regression psychoanalysis has made one of the most
important discoveries which have been made in this sphere. Not only has
the earlier exposition of the genesis of neurosis been already
subverted, or at least widely modified, but, at the same time, the
_actual conflict_ has received its proper valuation.


                The Significance of the Actual Conflict


In the case I have described, we saw that we could understand the
symptomatological dramatization as soon as it could be conceived as an
expression of the actual conflict. Here the psychoanalytic theory agrees
with the results of the association-experiments, of which I spoke in my
lectures[10] at Clark University. The association-experiment, with a
neurotic person, gives us a series of references to certain conflicts of
the actual life, which we call complexes. These complexes contain those
problems and difficulties which have brought the patient into opposition
with himself. Generally we find a love-conflict of an obvious character.
From the standpoint of the association-experiment, neurosis seems to be
something quite different from what it appeared from the standpoint of
the earlier psychoanalytic theory. Considered from the standpoint of the
latter theory, neurosis seemed to be a growth which had its roots in
earliest childhood, and overgrew the normal structure. Considered from
the standpoint of the association-experiment, neurosis seems to be a
reaction from an actual conflict, which is naturally found also among
normal people, but among them the conflict is solved without too great
difficulty. The neurotic remains in the grip of his conflict, and his
neurosis seems, more or less, to be the consequence of this stagnation.
So we may say that the result of the association-experiments tell in
favor of the theory of regression.

With the former historical conception of neurosis, we thought we
understood clearly why a neurotic person, with his powerful
parent-complex, had such great difficulty in adapting himself to life.
Now that we know that normal persons have the same complex, and in
principle have to pass through just the same psychological development
as a neurotic, we can no longer explain neurosis as a certain
development of phantasy-systems. The really illuminating way to put the
problem is a prospective one. We do not ask any longer if the patient
has a father- or a mother-complex, or unconscious incest-phantasies
which worry him. To-day, we know that every one has such things. The
belief that only neurotics had these complexes was an error. We ask now:
What is the task which the patient does not wish to fulfil? From which
necessary difficulties of life does the patient try to withdraw himself?

When people try always to adapt themselves to the conditions of life,
the libido is employed rightly and adequately. When this is not the
case, the libido is stored up and produces regressive symptoms. The
inadequate adaptation, that is to say, the abnormal indecision of
neurotics in face of difficulties, is easily accounted for by their
strong subjection to their phantasies, in consequence of which reality
seems to them, wholly or partly, more unreal, valueless and
uninteresting than to normal people. These heightened phantasies are the
results of innumerable regressions. The ultimate and deepest root is the
innate sensitiveness, which causes difficulties even to the infant at
the mother’s breast, in the form of unnecessary irritation and
resistances. Call it sensitiveness or whatever you like, this unknown
element of predisposition is in every case of neurosis.


          The Etiological Significance of Phantasy Criticized


The apparent etiological development of neurosis, discovered by
psychoanalysis, is in reality only the work of causally connected
phantasies, which the patient has created from that libido which at
times he did not employ in the biological adaptation. Thus, these
apparently etiological phantasies seem to be forms of compensation,
disguises, for an unfulfilled adaptation to reality. The vicious circle
previously mentioned between the withdrawing in the face of difficulties
and the regression into the world of phantasies, is naturally
well-suited to give the illusion of an apparent striking causal
relationship, so that both the patient and the physician believe in it.
In such a development accidental experiences are only “extenuating
circumstances.” I feel I must make allowance for those critics who, on
reading the history of psychoanalytic patients, get the impression of
phantastic elaboration. Only they make the mistake of attributing the
phantastic artefacts and far-fetched arbitrary symbolism to the
suggestion and to the awful phantasy of the physician, instead of to the
unequalled fertility of phantasy on the part of the patient. Of a truth,
there is a good deal of artificial elaboration in the phantasies of a
psychoanalytic case. There are generally significant signs of the
patient’s active imagination. The critics are not so wrong when they say
that their neurotic patients have no such phantasies. I have no doubt
that patients are unconscious of the greater part of their own
phantasies. A phantasy only “really” exists in the unconscious, when it
has some notable effect upon the conscious, _e. g._, in the form of a
dream; otherwise, we may say with a clear conscience that it is not
real. Every one who overlooks the frequently nearly imperceptible
effects of unconscious phantasies upon the conscious, or renounces the
fundamental, and technically incontestable analysis of dreams, can
easily overlook the phantasies of his patients altogether. We are,
therefore, inclined to smile when we hear this repeated objection. But
we must admit that there is some truth in it. The regressive tendency of
the patient is strengthened by the attention bestowed on it, and
directed to the unconscious, that is to say, to the phantasies he
discovers and forms during analysis. We might even perhaps go so far as
to say that, during the time of analysis, this phantasy-production is
greatly increased, as the patient is strengthened in his regressive
tendency, by the interest taken by the physician and originates even
more phantasies than he did before. Hence, our critics have repeatedly
stated that a conscientious therapy of the neurosis should go in exactly
the opposite direction to that taken by psychoanalysis; in other words,
it has been the chief endeavor of therapy, hitherto, to extricate the
patient from his unhealthy phantasies and bring him back again to real
life.

Footnote 10:

  Am. Journ. Psych., April, 1910.




                               CHAPTER IX
             The Therapeutical Principles of Psychoanalysis


While the psychoanalyst, of course, knows of this therapeutic tendency
to extricate the patient from his unhealthy phantasies, he also knows
just how far this mere extricating of neurotic patients from their
phantasies goes. As physicians, we should never think of preferring a
difficult and complicated method, assailed by all authorities, to a
simple, clear and easy one without good reason. I am perfectly
well-acquainted with hypnotic suggestion, and with Dubois’ method of
persuasion, but I do not use these methods, on account of their relative
inadequacy. For the same reason, I do not use the direct “ré-éducation
de la volonté” as the psychoanalytic method gives me better results.

In applying psychoanalysis we must grant the regressive phantasies of
the patient, for psychoanalysis has a much broader outlook, as regards
the valuation of symptoms, than have the above psychotherapeutic
methods. These all emanate from the assertion that a neurosis is an
absolute morbid formation.

The reigning school of neurology has never thought of considering
neurosis as a healing process also, and of attributing to the neurotic
formations a quite special teleological meaning. Neurosis, like every
other disease, is a compromise between the morbid tendencies, and the
normal function. Modern medicine no longer considers fever as the
illness itself, but a purposeful reaction of the organism.
Psychoanalysis, likewise, no longer conceives a neurosis as eo ipso
morbid, but as also having a meaning and a purpose. From this there
follows the more reserved and expectant attitude of psychoanalysis
towards neurosis. Psychoanalysis does not judge the value of the
symptoms, but first tries to understand what tendencies lie beneath
these symptoms. If we were able to abolish a neurosis in the same way,
for instance, as a cancer is destroyed, then at the same time there
would be destroyed a great amount of available energy also. We save this
energy, that is, we make it serve the purposes of the instinct for
health, as soon as we can trace the meaning of these symptoms; by taking
part in the regressive movement of the patient. Those unfamiliar with
the essentials of psychoanalysis will have some difficulty in
understanding how a therapeutic effect can come to pass when the
physician takes part in the pernicious phantasies of the patient. Not
only critics, but the patients also, doubt the therapeutic value of such
a method, which concentrates attention upon phantasies which the patient
rejects as worthless and reprehensible. The patients will often tell you
that their former physicians forbade them to occupy themselves with
their phantasies, and told them that they must only consider that it is
well with them, when they are free, if but momentarily, from their awful
torments. So, it seems strange enough that it should be of any use to
them, when the treatment brings them back to the very thing from which
they have tried constantly to escape. The following answer may be made:
all depends upon the position which the patient takes up towards his own
phantasies. These phantasies have been hitherto, for the patient, an
absolutely passive and involuntary manifestation. As we say, he was lost
in his dreams. The patient’s so-called brooding is an involuntary kind
of dreaming too. What psychoanalysis demands from a patient is only
apparently the same. Only a man who has a very superficial knowledge of
psychoanalysis can confuse this passive dreaming with the position taken
up in analysis. What psychoanalysis asks from the patient is just the
contrary of what the patient has always done. The patient can be
compared to a person who, unintentionally, has fallen into the water and
sunk, whilst psychoanalysis wants him to dive in, as it was no mere
chance which led him to fall in at just that spot. There lies a sunken
treasure, and only a diver can raise it.

The patient, judging his phantasies from the standpoint of his reason,
regards them as valueless and senseless; but, in reality, the phantasies
have their great influence on the patient because they are of great
importance. They are old, sunken treasures, which can only be recovered
by a diver, that is, the patients, contrary to their wont, must now pay
an active attention to their inner life. Where they formerly dreamed,
they must now think, consciously and intentionally. This new way of
thinking about himself has about as much resemblance to the patient’s
former mental condition as a diver has to a drowning man. The earlier
joy in indulgence has now become a purpose and an aim—that is, has
become work. The patient, assisted by the physician, occupies himself
with his phantasies, not to lose himself therein, but to uproot them,
piece by piece, and to bring them into daylight. He thus reaches an
objective standpoint towards his inner life, and everything he formerly
loathed and feared is now considered consciously. This contains the
basis of the whole psychoanalytic therapy. In consequence of his
illness, the patient stood, partially or totally, outside of real life.
Consequently he neglected many of his life’s duties, either in regard to
social work or to the ordinary daily tasks. If he wishes to be well, he
must return to the fulfilment of his particular obligations. Let me say,
by way of caution, that we are not to understand by such “duties,” some
general ethical postulates, but duties towards himself. Nor does this
mean that they are eo ipso egoistic interests, since we are social
beings as well, a matter too easily forgotten by individualists. An
ordinary person will feel very much more comfortable sharing a common
virtue than possessing an individual vice, even if the latter is a very
seductive one. They must be already neurotic, or otherwise extraordinary
people who can be deluded by such particular interests. The neurotic
fled from his duties and his libido withdrew, at least partly, from the
tasks imposed by real life. In consequence, the libido became
introverted and directed towards an inner life. The libido followed the
path of regression: to a large extent phantasies replaced reality,
because the patient refused to overcome certain real difficulties.
Unconsciously the neurotic patient prefers—and very often consciously
too—his dreams and phantasies to reality. To bring him back to real life
and to the fulfilment of its necessary duties, the analysis proceeds
along the same false path of regression which has been taken by his
libido; so that the beginning of psychoanalysis looks as if it were
supporting the morbid tendencies of the patient. But psychoanalysis
follows these phantasies, these wrong paths, in order to restore the
libido, which is the valuable part of the phantasies, to the conscious
self and to the duties of the moment. This can only be done by bringing
the phantasies into the light of day, and along with them the libido
bound up with them. We might leave these unconscious phantasies to their
shadowy existence, if no libido were attached to them. It is unavoidable
that the patient, feeling himself at the beginning of analysis confirmed
in his regressive tendencies, leads his analytical interest, amid
increasing resistances, down to the depths of the shadowy world. We can
easily understand that any physician who is a normal person experiences
the greatest resistance towards the thoroughly morbid, regressive
tendency of the patient, since he feels quite certain that this tendency
is pathological. And this all the more because, as physician, he
believes he is right in refusing to give heed to his patient’s
phantasies. It is quite conceivable that the physician feels a repulsion
towards this tendency; it is undoubtedly repugnant to see how a person
is completely given up to such phantasies, finding only himself of any
importance and never ceasing to admire or despise himself. The esthetic
sense of normal people has, as a rule, little pleasure in neurotic
phantasies, even if it does not find them absolutely repulsive. The
psychoanalyst must put aside such esthetic judgment, just as every
physician must, who really tries to help his patients. He may not fear
any dirty work. Of course there are a great many patients physically
ill, who, without undergoing an exact examination or local treatment, do
recover by the use of general physical, dietetic, or suggestive means.
Severe cases can, however, only be helped by a more exact examination
and therapy, based on a profound knowledge of the illness. Our
psychotherapeutic methods hitherto have been like these general
measures. In slight cases they did no harm; on the contrary, they were
often of great service. But for a great many patients these measures
have proved inadequate. If they really can be helped, it will be by
psychoanalysis, which is not to say that psychoanalysis is a universal
panacea. Such a sneer proceeds only from ill-natured criticism. We know
very well that psychoanalysis fails in many cases. As everybody knows,
we shall never be able to cure all illnesses.

This “diving” work of analysis brings dirty matter piecemeal out of the
slime, which must then be cleansed before we can tell its value. The
dirty phantasies are valueless and are thrown aside, but the libido
actuating them is of value and this, after cleansing, becomes
serviceable again. To the psychoanalyst, as to every specialist, it will
sometimes seem that the phantasies have also a value of their own, and
not only by reason of the libido linked with them. But their value is
not, in the first instance, for the patient. For the physician, these
phantasies have a scientific value, just as if is of special interest to
the surgeon to know whether the pus contained staphylococci or
streptococci. To the patient it is all the same, and for him, it is
better that the doctor conceal his scientific interest, in order not to
tempt him to have greater pleasure than necessary in his phantasies. The
etiological importance which is attached to these phantasies,
incorrectly, to my mind, explains why so much room is given up in
psychoanalytic literature to the extensive discussion of the various
sexual phantasies. Once if is known that absolutely nothing is
impossible in the sphere of sexual phantasy, the former estimate of
these phantasies will disappear, and therewith the endeavor to discover
in them an etiological import. Nor will the most extended discussion of
these cases ever be able to exhaust this sphere.

Every case is theoretically inexhaustible. But in general the production
of phantasies ceases after a time. Naturally, we must not conclude from
this that the possibility of creating phantasies is exhausted, but the
cessation in their production only means that there is then no more
libido on the path of regression. The end of the regressive movement is
reached as soon as the libido takes hold of the present real duties of
life, and is used to solve those problems. But there are cases, and
these not a few, where the patient continues longer than usual to
produce endless phantastic manifestations, either from his own pleasure
in them or from certain false expectations on the part of the doctor.
Such a mistake is especially easy for beginners, since, blinded by the
present psychoanalytical discussion, they keep their interest fixed on
these phantasies, because they seem to possess etiological significance.
They are therefore constantly at pains to fish up phantasies of early
childhood, vainly hoping to find thus the solution of the neurotic
difficulties. They do not see that the solution lies in action, and in
the fulfilment of certain necessary duties of life. It will be objected
that the neurosis is entirely due to the incapacity of the patient to
carry out these very demands of life, and that therapy by the analysis
of the unconscious ought to enable him to do so, or at least, give him
means to do so. The objection put in this way is perfectly valid, but we
have to add that it is only so when the patient is really conscious of
the duties he has to fulfil, not only academically, in their general
theoretical outlines but in their most minute details. It is
characteristic for neurotic people to be wanting in this knowledge,
although, because of their intelligence, they are well aware of the
general duties of life, and struggle, perhaps only too hard, to fulfil
the prescriptions of current morality. But the much more important
duties which he ought to fulfil towards himself are to a great extent
unknown to the neurotic; sometimes even they are not known at all. It is
not enough, therefore, to follow the patient blindfold on the path of
regression, and to push him by an inopportune etiological interest back
into his infantile phantasies. I have often heard from patients, with
whom the psychoanalytic treatment has come to a standstill: “The doctor
believes I must have somewhere some infantile trauma, or an infantile
phantasy which I am still repressing.” Apart from the cases where this
supposition was really true, I have seen cases in which the stoppage was
caused by the fact that the libido, hauled up by the analysis, sank back
into the depths again for want of employment. This was due to the
physician’s attention being directed entirely to the infantile
phantasies, and his failing therefore to see what duties of the moment
the patient had to fulfil. The consequence was that the libido brought
forth by analysis always sank back again, as no opportunity for further
activity was found.

There are many patients who, on their own account, discover their
life-tasks and abandon the production of regressive phantasies pretty
soon, because they prefer to live in reality, rather than in their
phantasies. It is a pity that this cannot be said of all patients. A
good many of them forsake for a long time, or even forever, the
fulfilment of their life-tasks, and prefer their idle neurotic dreaming.
I must again emphasize that we do not understand by “dreaming” always a
conscious phenomenon.

In accordance with these facts and these views, the character of
psychoanalysis has changed during the course of time. If the first stage
of psychoanalysis was perhaps a kind of surgery, which would remove from
the mind of the patient the foreign body, the “blocked” affect, the
later form has been a kind of historical method, which tries to
investigate carefully the genesis of the neurosis, down to its smallest
details, and to reduce it to its earliest origins.


                     The Conception of Transference


This last method has unmistakably been due to strong scientific
interest, the traces of which are clearly seen in the delineations of
cases so far. Thanks to this, Freud was also able to discover wherein
lay the therapeutical effect of psychoanalysis. Whilst formerly this was
sought in the discharge of the traumatic affect, it was now seen that
the phantasies produced were especially associated with the personality
of the physician. Freud calls this process _transference_
(“Uebertragung”), owing to the fact that the images of the parents
(“imagines”) are henceforth transferred to the physician, along with the
infantile attitude of mind adopted towards the parents. The transference
does not arise solely in the intellectual sphere, but the libido bound
up with the phantasy is transferred, together with the phantasy itself,
to the personality of the physician, so that the physician replaces the
parents to a certain extent. All the apparently sexual phantasies which
have been connected with the parents are now connected with the
physician, and the less this is realized by the patient, the more he
will be unconsciously bound to his physician. This recognition is in
many ways of prime importance.

This process has an important biological value for the patient. The less
libido he gives to reality, the more exaggerated will be his phantasies,
and the more he will be cut off from the world. Typical of neurotic
people is their attitude of disharmony towards reality, that is, their
diminished capacity for adaptation. Through the transference to the
physician, a bridge is built, across which the patient can get away from
his family, into reality. In other words, he can emerge from his
infantile environment into the world of grown-up people, for here the
physician stands for a part of the extra-familial world. But on the
other hand, this transference is a powerful hindrance to the progress of
treatment, for the patient assimilates the personality of the physician
as if he did stand for father or mother, and not for a part of the
extra-familial world. If the patient could acquire the image of the
physician as a part of the non-infantile world, he would gain a
considerable advantage. But transference has the opposite effect; hence
the whole advantage of the new acquisition is neutralized. The more the
patient succeeds in regarding his doctor as he does any other
individual, the more he is able to consider himself objectively, the
greater becomes the advantage of transference. The less he is able to
consider his doctor in this way, the more the physician is assimilated
with the father, the less is the advantage of the transference and the
greater will be its harm. The familial environment of the patient has
only become increased by an additional personality assimilated to his
parents. The patient himself is, as before, still in his childish
surroundings, and therefore maintains his infantile attitude of mind. In
this manner, all the advantages of transference can be lost.

There are patients who follow the analysis with the greatest interest
without making the slightest improvement, remaining extraordinarily
productive in phantasies, although the whole development of their
neurosis, even to the smallest details, has been brought to light. A
physician under the influence of the historical view might be thus
easily thrown into confusion, and would have to ask himself: What is
there in this case still to be analyzed? Those are just the cases of
which I spoke before, where it is no longer a matter of the analysis of
the historical material, but we have now to face a practical problem,
the overcoming of the inadequate infantile attitude of mind. Of course,
the historical analysis would show repeatedly that the patient had a
childish attitude towards his physician, but it would not bring us any
solution of the question how that attitude could be changed. To a
certain extent, this serious disadvantage of transference is found in
every case. Gradually it has been proved that this part of
psychoanalysis is, considered from a scientific standpoint,
extraordinarily interesting and of great value, but in its practical
aspect, of less importance than that which has now to follow, namely,
the _analysis of the transference_.


                     Confession and Psychoanalysis


Before we enter into a more detailed consideration of this practical
part of psychoanalysis, I should like to mention a parallelism between
the first part of psychoanalysis and a historical institution of our
civilization. It is not difficult to guess this parallelism. We find it
in the religious institution called _confession_. By nothing are people
more cut off from fellowship with others than by a secret borne about
within them. It is not that a secret actually cuts off a person from
communicating with his fellows, yet somehow personal secrets which are
zealously guarded do have this effect. “Sinful” deeds and thoughts, for
instance, are the secrets which separate one person from another. Great
relief is therefore gained by confessing them. This relief is due to the
re-admission of the individual to the community. His loneliness, which
was so difficult to bear, ceases. Herein lies the essential value of the
confession. But this confession means at the same time, through the
phenomenon of transference and its unconscious phantasies, that the
individual becomes tied to his confessor. This was probably
instinctively intended by the Church. The fact that perhaps the greater
part of humanity wants to be guided, justifies the moral value
attributed to this institution by the Church. The priest is furnished
with all the attributes of paternal authority, and upon him rests the
obligation to guide his congregation, just as a father guides his
children. Thus the priest replaces the parents and to a certain extent
frees his people from their infantile bonds. In so far as the priest is
a highly moral personality, with a nobility of soul, and an adequate
culture, this institution may be commended as a splendid instance of
social control and education, which served humanity during the space of
two thousand years. So long as the Christian Church of the Middle Ages
was capable of being the guardian of culture and science, in which rôle
her success was, in part, due to her wide toleration of the secular
element, confession was an admirable method for the education of the
people. But confession lost its greatest value, at least for the more
educated, as soon as the Church was unable to maintain her leadership
over the more emancipated portion of the community and became incapable,
through her rigidity, of following the intellectual life of the nations.

The more highly educated men of to-day do not want to be guided by a
belief or a rigid dogma; they want to understand. Therefore, they put
aside everything that they do not understand, and the religious symbol
is very little accessible for general understanding. The sacrificium
intellectus is an act of violence, to which the moral conscience of the
highly developed man is opposed. But in a large number of cases,
transference to, and dependence upon the analyst could be considered as
a sufficient end, with a definite therapeutic effect, if the analyst
were in every respect a great personality, capable and competent to
guide the patients given into his charge and to be a father of his
people. But a modern, mentally-developed person desires to guide
himself, and to stand on his own feet. He wants to take the helm in his
own hands; the steering has too long been done by others. He wants to
understand; in other words, he wants to be a grown-up person. It is much
easier to be guided, but this no longer suits the well-educated of the
present time, for they feel the necessity of the moral independence
demanded by the spirit of our time. _Modern humanity demands moral
autonomy._ Psychoanalysis has to allow this claim, and refuses to guide
and to advise. The psychoanalytic physician knows his own shortcomings
too well, and therefore cannot believe that he can be father and leader.
His highest ambition must only consist in educating his patients to
become independent personalities, and in freeing them from their
unconscious dependency within infantile limitations. Psychoanalysis has
therefore to analyze the transference, a task left untouched by the
priest. In so doing, the unconscious dependence upon the physician is
cut off, and the patient is put upon his own feet; this at least is the
end at which the physician aims.


                    The Analysis of the Transference


We have already seen that the transference brings about difficulties,
because the personality of the physician is assimilated with the image
of the patient’s parents. The first part of the analysis, the
investigation of the patient’s complexes, is rather easy, chiefly
because a man is relieved by ridding himself of his secrets,
difficulties and pains. In the second place, he experiences a peculiar
satisfaction from at last finding some one who shows interest in all
those things to which nobody hitherto would listen. It is very agreeable
to find a person, who tries to understand him, and does not shrink back.
In the third place, the expressed intention of the physician, to
understand him and to follow him through all his erring ways,
pathetically affects the patient. The feeling of being understood is
especially sweet to the solitary souls who are forever longing for
“understanding.” In this they are insatiable. The beginning of the
analysis is for these reasons fairly easy and simple. The improvement so
easily gained, and the sometimes striking change in the patient’s
condition of health are a great temptation to the psychoanalytic
beginner to slip into a therapeutic optimism and an analytical
superficiality, neither of which would correspond to the seriousness and
the difficulties of the situation. The trumpeting of therapeutic
successes is nowhere more contemptible than in psychoanalysis, for no
one is better able to understand than a psychoanalyst how the so-called
result of the therapy depends on the coöperation of nature and the
patient himself. The psychoanalyst may rest content with possessing an
advanced scientific insight. The prevailing psychoanalytic literature
cannot be spared reproach that some of its works do give a false
impression as to its real nature. There are therapeutical publications
from which the uninitiated receive the impression that psychoanalysis is
more or less a clever trick, with astonishing effects. The first part of
analysis, where we try to understand, and which, as we have seen before,
offers much relief to the patient’s feelings, is responsible for these
illusions. These incidental benefits help the phenomenon of
transference. The patient has long felt the need of help to free him
from his inward isolation and his lack of self-understanding. So he
gives way to his transference, after first struggling against it. For a
neurotic person, the transference is an ideal situation. He himself
makes no effort, and nevertheless another person meets him halfway, with
an apparent affectionate understanding; does not even get annoyed or
leave off his patient endeavors, although he himself is sometimes
stubborn and makes childish resistances. By this means the strongest
resistances are melted away, for the interest of the physician meets the
need of a better adaptation to extra-familial reality. The patient
obtains, through the transference, not only his parents, who used to
bestow great attention upon him, but in addition he gets a relationship
outside the family, and thus fulfils a necessary duty of life. The
therapeutical success so often to be seen at the same time fortifies the
patient’s belief that this new-gained situation is an excellent one.
Here we can easily understand that the patient is not in the least
inclined to abandon this newly-found advantage. If it depended upon him,
he would be forever associated with his physician. In consequence, he
begins to produce all kinds of phantasies, in order to find possible
ways of maintaining the association with his physician. He makes the
greatest resistances towards his physician, when the latter tries to
dissolve the transference. At the same time, we must not forget that for
our patients the acquisition of a relationship outside the family is one
of the most important duties of life, and one, moreover, which up to
this moment they had failed or but very imperfectly succeeded in
accomplishing. I must oppose myself energetically to the view that we
always mean by this relationship outside the family, a sexual relation
in its popular sense. This is the misunderstanding fallen into by so
many neurotic people, who believe that a right attitude toward reality
is only to be found by way of concrete sexuality. There are even
physicians, not psychoanalysts, who are of the same conviction. But this
is the primitive adaptation which we find among uncivilized people under
primitive conditions. If we lend uncritical support to this tendency of
neurotic people to adapt themselves in an infantile way, we just
encourage them in the infantilism from which they are suffering. The
neurotic patient has to learn that higher adaptation which is demanded
by life from civilized and grown-up people. Whoever has a tendency to
sink lower, will proceed to do so; for this end he does not need
psychoanalysis. But we must be careful not to fall into the opposite
extreme and believe that we can create by analysis great personalities.
Psychoanalysis stands above traditional morality. It follows no
arbitrary moral standard. It is only a means to bring to light the
individual trends, and to develop and harmonize them as perfectly as
possible.

Analysis must be a biological method, that is, a method which tries to
connect the highest subjective well-being with the most valuable
biological activity. The best result for a person who passes through
analysis, is that he becomes at the end what he really is, in harmony
with himself, neither bad nor good, but an ordinary human being.
Psychoanalysis cannot be considered a method of education, if by
education is understood the possibility of shaping a tree to a highly
artificial form. But whoever has the higher conception of education will
most prize that educational method which can cultivate a tree so that it
shall fulfil to perfection its own natural conditions of growth. We
yield too much to the ridiculous fear that we are at bottom quite
impossible beings, and that if everyone were to appear as he really is a
dreadful social catastrophe would result. The individualistic thinkers
of our day insist on understanding by “people as they really are,” only
the discontented, anarchistic and egotistic element in humanity; they
quite forget that this same humanity has created those well-established
forms of our civilization which possess greater strength and solidity
than all the anarchistic under-currents.

When we try to dissolve the transference we have to fight against powers
which have not only neurotic value, but also universal normal
significance. When we try to bring the patient to the dissolution of his
transference, we are asking more from him than is generally asked of the
average man; we ask that he should subdue himself wholly. Only certain
religions have made such a claim on humanity, and it is this demand
which makes the second part of analysis so difficult.

The technique that we have to employ for the analysis of the
transference is exactly the same as that before described. Naturally the
problem as to what the patient must do with the libido which is now
withdrawn from the physician comes to the fore. Here again, there is
great danger for the beginner, as he will be inclined to suggest, or to
give suggestive advice. This would be extremely pleasant for the patient
in every respect, and therefore fatal.


                      The Problem of Self-Analysis


I think here is the place to say something about the indispensable
conditions of the psychology of the psychoanalyst himself.
Psychoanalysis is by no means an instrument applied to the patient only;
it is self-evident that it must be applied to the psychoanalyst first. I
believe that it is not only a moral, but a professional duty also, for
the physician to submit himself to the psychoanalytic process, in order
to clean his mind from his own unconscious interferences. Even if he is
entitled to trust to his own personal honesty, that will not suffice to
save him from the misleading influences of his own unconscious. _The
unconscious is unknown, even to the most frank and honest person._
Without analysis the physician will inevitably be blindfolded in all
those places where he meets his own complexes; this is a situation of
dangerous importance in the analysis of transference. Do not forget that
the complexes of a neurotic are only the complexes of all human beings,
the psychoanalyst included. Through the interference of your own hidden
wishes you will do the greatest harm to your patients. The psychoanalyst
must never forget that _the final aim of psychoanalysis is the personal
freedom and moral independence of the patient_.


                         The Analysis of Dreams


Here, as everywhere in analysis, we have to follow the patient along the
line of his own impulses, even if the path seems to be a wrong one.
Error is just as important a condition of mental progress as truth. In
this second step of analysis, with all its hidden precipices and
sand-banks, we owe a great deal to _dreams_. At the beginning of
analysis dreams chiefly helped in discovering phantasies; here they
guide us, in a most valuable way, to the application of the libido.
Freud’s work laid the foundation of an immense increase in our knowledge
in regard to the interpretation of the dream’s content, through its
historical material and its tendency to express wishes. He showed us how
dreams open the way to the acquisition of unconscious material. In
accordance with his genius for the purely historical method, he apprises
us chiefly of the analytical relations. Although this method is
incontestably of the greatest importance, we ought not to take up this
standpoint exclusively, as such an historical conception does not
sufficiently take account of the _teleological meaning of dreams_.

Conscious thinking would be quite insufficiently characterized, if we
considered it only from its historical determinants. For its complete
valuation, we have unquestionably to consider its teleological or
prospective meaning as well. If we pursued the history of the English
Parliament back to its first origin, we should certainly arrive at a
perfect understanding of its development, and the determination of its
present form. But we should know nothing about its prospective function,
that is, about the work which it has to accomplish now, and in the
future. The same thing is to be said about dreams. Their prospective
function has been valued only by superstitious peoples and times, but
probably there is much truth in their view. Not that we pretend that
dreams have any prophetic foreboding, but we suggest, that there might
be a possibility of discovering in their unconscious material those
future combinations which are subliminal just because they have not
reached the distinctiveness or the intensity which consciousness
requires. Here I am thinking of those indistinct presentments of the
future which we sometimes have, which are nothing else than subliminal
combinations, the objective value of which we are not able to
apperceive. The future tendencies of the patient are elaborated by this
indirect analysis, and, if this work is successful, the convalescent
passes out of treatment and out of his half-infantile state of
transference into life, which has been inwardly carefully prepared for,
which has been chosen by himself, and to which, after many
deliberations, he has at last made up his mind.




                               CHAPTER X
                 Some General Remarks on Psychoanalysis


As may easily be understood, psychoanalysis will never do for polyclinic
work, and will therefore always remain in the hands of those few who,
because of their innate and trained psychological faculties, are
particularly apt and have a special liking for this profession. Just as
not every physician makes a good surgeon, so neither will every one make
a good psychoanalyst. The predominant psychological character of
psychoanalytic work will make it difficult for doctors to monopolize it.
Sooner or later other faculties will master it, either for practical
uses or for its theoretical interest. Of course the treatment must
remain confined entirely to the hands of responsible scientific people.

So long as official science excludes psychoanalysis from general
discussion, as pure nonsense, we cannot be astonished if those belonging
to other faculties master this material even before the medical
profession. And this will occur the more because psychoanalysis is a
general psychological method of investigation, as well as a heuristic
principle of the first rank in all departments of mental science
(“Geisteswissenschaften”). Chiefly through the work of the Zürich
School, the possibility of applying psychoanalysis to the domain of the
mental diseases has been demonstrated. Psychoanalytical investigation of
dementia præcox, for instance, brought us the most valuable insight into
the psychological structure of this remarkable disease. It would lead me
too far were I to demonstrate to you the results of those
investigations. The theory of the psychological determinants of this
disease is already in itself a vast territory. Even if I had to treat
but the symbolic problems of dementia præcox I should be obliged to lay
before you so much material, that I could not possibly master it within
the limits of these lectures, which must give a general survey.

The question of dementia præcox has become so extraordinarily
complicated because of the quite recent incursion on the part of
psychoanalysis into the domains of mythology and comparative religion,
whence we have derived a deeper insight into ethical psychological
symbolism. Those who are well-acquainted with the symbolism of dreams
and of dementia præcox have been greatly impressed by the striking
parallelism between modern individual symbols and those found in
folk-lore. The extraordinary parallelism between ethnic symbolism and
that of dementia præcox is remarkably clear. This fact induced me to
make an extended comparative investigation of individual and ethnic
symbolism, the results of which have been recently published.[11] This
complication of psychology with the problem of mythology makes it
impossible for me to demonstrate to you my conception of dementia
præcox. For the same reasons, I must forego the discussion of the
results of psychoanalytic investigation in the domain of mythology and
comparative religions. It would be impossible to do this without setting
forth all the material belonging to it. The main result of these
investigations is, for the moment, the knowledge of the far-reaching
parallelisms between the ethnical and the individual symbolisms. From
the present position of this work, we can scarcely conceive what a vast
perspective may result from this comparative ethnopsychology. Through
the study of mythology, the psychoanalytical knowledge of the nature of
the unconscious processes we may expect to be enormously enriched and
deepened.

I must limit myself, if I am to give you in the course of my lectures a
more or less general presentation of the psychoanalytic school. A
detailed elaboration of this method and its theory would have demanded
an enormous display of cases, whose delineation would have detracted
from a comprehensive view of the whole. But to give you an insight into
the concrete proceedings of psychoanalytic treatment, I decided to bring
before you a short analysis of a girl of eleven years of age. The case
was analyzed by my assistant, Miss Mary Moltzer. In the first place, I
must mention that this case is by no means typical, either in the length
of its time, or in the course of its general analysis; it is just as
little so as an individual is characteristic for all other people.
Nowhere is the abstraction of universal rules more difficult than in
psychoanalysis, for which reason it is better to abstain from too many
rules. We must never forget that, notwithstanding the great uniformity
of complexes and conflicts, every case is unique. For every individual
is unique. Every case demands from the physician an individual interest,
and in every case you will find the course of analysis different. In
describing this case, I offer you a small section of the vast diverse
psychological world, showing all those apparently bizarre and arbitrary
peculiarities scattered over human life by the whims of so-called
chance. I have no intention of withholding any of the minute
psychoanalytic details, as I do not want to make you believe that
psychoanalysis is a method with rigid laws. The scientific interest of
the investigator inclines him to find rules and categories, in which the
most living of all things alive can be included. But the physician as
well as the observer, free from all formulas, ought to have an open eye
for the whole lawless wealth of living reality. In this way I will
endeavor to present to you this case, and I hope also to succeed in
demonstrating to you how differently an analysis develops from what
might have been expected from purely theoretical considerations.


                     A Case of Neurosis in a Child


The case in question is that of an intelligent girl of eleven years of
age, of good family. The history of the disease is as follows:


                               Anamnesis


She had to leave school several times on account of sudden sickness and
headache, and was obliged to go to bed. In the morning she sometimes
refused to get up and go to school. She suffered from bad dreams, was
capricious and not to be counted upon.

I informed the mother, who came to consult me, that these things were
neurotic signs, and that some special circumstance must be hidden there,
necessitating an interrogation of the child. This supposition was not
arbitrary, for every attentive observer knows that if children are
restless or in bad temper, there is always something painful worrying
them. If it were not painful, they would tell it, and they would not be
worried over it. Of course, I am only speaking of those cases having a
psychogenic cause. The child confessed to her mother the following
story: She had a favorite teacher, of whom she was very fond. During
this last term she had fallen back somewhat, through working
insufficiently, and she believed she had rather fallen in the estimation
of her teacher. She then began to feel sick during his lessons. She felt
not only estranged from her teacher, but even somewhat hostile. She
directed all her friendly feelings to a poor boy with whom she usually
shared the bread which she took to school. Later on she gave him money,
so that he could buy bread for himself. In a conversation with this boy
she made fun of her teacher and called him a goat. The boy attached
himself more and more to her, and considered that he had the right to
levy a tax on her occasionally in the form of a little present of money.
She now became greatly alarmed lest the boy might tell her teacher that
she turned him into ridicule and called him a “goat,” and she promised
him two francs if he would give his solemn word never to tell anything
to her teacher. From that moment the boy began to exploit her; he
demanded money with threats and persecuted her with his demands on the
way to school. This made her perfectly miserable. Her attacks of
sickness are closely connected with all this story. But after the affair
had been disposed of by this confession, her peace of mind was not
restored as might have been expected.

We very often see, as I have said, that the mere relation of a painful
affair can have an important therapeutical effect. Generally this does
not last very long, although on occasion such a favorable effect can
maintain itself for a long time. Such a confession is naturally a long
way from being an analysis. But there are nerve-specialists nowadays who
believe that an analysis is only a somewhat more extensive anamnesis or
confession.

A little while later the child had an attack of coughing and missed
school for one day. After that she went to school for one day and felt
perfectly well. On the third day, a renewed attack of coughing came on,
with pains on the left side, fever and vomiting. Her temperature,
accurately taken, showed 39.4° C., about 103° F. The doctor feared
pneumonia. But the next day everything had passed away. She felt quite
well and not the slightest sign of fever or sickness was to be noted.

But still our little patient wept the whole time and did not wish to get
up. From this strange course of events I suspected some serious
neurosis, and I therefore advised treatment by analysis.


                           Analytic Treatment


First interview: The little girl seemed to be nervous and constrained,
having a disagreeable forced laugh. Miss Moltzer, who analyzed her, gave
her first of all an opportunity of talking about her staying in bed. We
learn that she liked it immensely, as she always had some society.
Everybody came to see her; also her mother read to her out of a book
which contained the story of _a prince who was ill, but who recovered
when his wish was fulfilled, the wish being that his little friend, a
poor boy, might be allowed to stay with him_.

The obvious relation between this story and her own little love-story,
as well as its connection with her own illness, was pointed out to her,
whereupon she began to cry and say she would prefer to go to the other
children and play with them, otherwise they would run off. This was at
once allowed, and away she ran, but came back again, after a short
while, somewhat embarrassed. It was explained to her that she did not
run away because she was afraid her playmates would go, but that she
herself wanted to get off because of resistances.

At the second interview she was less anxious and repressed. They
happened to speak about the teacher, but then she was embarrassed. She
seemed to be ashamed at the end, and she timidly confessed that she
liked her teacher very much. It was then explained to her that she need
not be ashamed of that; on the contrary, her love for him could be a
valuable stimulus to make her do her very best in his lessons. “So I may
love him?” asked the little patient with a happier face.

This explanation justified the child in the choice of the object of her
affection. It seems as if she had been ashamed of admitting her feelings
for her teacher. It is not easy to explain why this should be so. Our
present conception tells us that the libido has great difficulty in
taking hold of a personality outside the family, because it still finds
itself in incestuous bonds,—a very plausible view indeed, from which it
is difficult to withdraw. But we must point out here that her libido was
placed with much intensity upon the poor boy, who was also someone
outside the family; whence we must conclude that the difficulty was not
to be found in the transference of the libido outside the family, but in
some other circumstance. The love of the teacher betokens a difficult
task; it demands much more than her love for the little boy, which does
not require any moral effort on her part. This indication in the
analysis that her love for her teacher would enable her to do her utmost
brings the child back to her real duty, namely, her adaptation to her
teacher.

The libido retires from before such a necessary task, for the very human
reason of indolence, which is highly developed, not only in children,
but also in primitive people. Primitive laziness and indolence are the
first resistances to the efforts towards adaptation. The libido which is
not used for this purpose becomes stagnant and will make the inevitable
regression to former objects or modes of employment. It is thus that the
incest-complex is revived in such a striking way. The libido avoids the
object which is so difficult to attain and demands such great efforts,
and turns towards the easier ones, and finally to the easiest of all,
namely, the infantile phantasies, which thus become real
incest-phantasies. The fact that, wherever there is present a
disturbance of psychological adaptation, one finds an exaggerated
development of incest-phantasies, must be conceived, as I have pointed
out, as a regressive phenomenon. That is to say, the incest-phantasy is
of secondary and not of causal significance, while the primary cause is
the resistance of human nature against any kind of exertion. The drawing
back from certain duties is not to be explained by saying that man
prefers the incestuous condition, but he has to fall back into it,
because he shuns exertion; otherwise it would have to be said that the
aversion from conscious effort must be taken as identical with the
preference for incestuous relations. This would be obvious nonsense, for
not only primitive man, but animals too, have a pronounced dislike for
all intentional efforts, and pay homage to absolute laziness, until
circumstances force them into action. We cannot pretend, either in very
primitive people or in animals, that their preference for incestuous
relations causes aversion towards efforts of adaptation, as in those
cases there can be no question of “incestuous” relations. This would
presuppose a differentiation of parents and non-parents.

Characteristically, the child expressed her joy at being allowed to love
her teacher, but not at being allowed to do her utmost for him. That she
might love her teacher is what she understood at once, because it suited
her best. Her relief was caused by the information that she was right in
loving him, even though she did not especially exert herself before.

The conversation ran on to the story of the extortion, which is now
again told in details. We hear further that she had tried to force open
her savings-bank, and as she could not succeed in doing so, she wanted
to steal the key from her mother. She expressed herself thus about the
whole matter: she ridiculed her teacher because he was much kinder to
the other girls than to her. But it was true that she did not do very
well in his lessons, especially at arithmetic. Once she did not
understand something, was afraid to ask, for fear she might lose his
esteem, and consequently she made many mistakes and did really lose it.
It is pretty clear that her position towards her teacher became
consequently very unsatisfactory. About this time it happened that a
young girl in her class was sent home because she was sick. Soon after,
the same thing happened to herself. In this way, she tried to get away
from the school which had become uncongenial to her. The loss of her
teacher’s respect led her on the one hand to insult him and on the other
into the affair with the little boy, obviously as a compensation for the
lost relationship with the teacher. The explanation which was given here
was a simple hint: she would be rendering a service to her teacher if
she took pains to understand the lessons by sensible questions.

I can add here that this hint, given in the analysis, had a good effect;
from that moment the little girl became one of the best of pupils, and
missed no more arithmetic lessons.

We must call attention to the fact that the story of the boy’s extortion
shows constraint and a lack of freedom. This phenomenon exactly follows
the rule. As soon as anyone permits his libido to draw back from
necessary tasks, it becomes autonomous and chooses, without regard to
the protests of the subject, its own way, and pursues it obstinately. It
is a general fact, that a lazy and inactive life is highly susceptible
to the _coercion of the libido_, that is to say, to all kinds of terrors
and involuntary obligations. The anxieties and superstitions of savages
furnish us with the best illustrations; but our own history of
civilization, especially the civilization and customs of the ancients,
abounds with confirmations. Non-employment of the libido makes it
autonomous, but we must not believe either that we are able to save
ourselves permanently from the coercion of the libido by making forced
efforts. To a certain limited extent we are able to set conscious tasks
to our libido, but other natural tasks are chosen by the libido itself,
and that is what the libido exists for. If we avoid those tasks, the
most active life can become useless, for we have to deal with the whole
of the conditions of our human nature. Innumerable cases of neurasthenia
from overwork can be traced back to this cause, for work done amid
internal conflicts creates nervous exhaustion.

At the third interview the little girl related a dream she had had when
she was five years old, and by which she was greatly impressed. She
says, “I’ll never forget this dream.” The dream runs as follows: “_I am
in a wood with my little brother and we are looking for strawberries.
Then a wolf came and jumped at me. I took to a staircase, the wolf after
me. I fall down and the wolf bites my leg. I awoke in terror._”

Before we go into the associations given by our little patient, I will
try to form an arbitrary opinion about the possible content of the
dream, and then compare our result afterwards with the associations
given by the child. The beginning of the dream reminds us of the
well-known German fairy-tale of Little Red-Ridinghood, which is, of
course, known to the child. The wolf ate the grandmother first, then
took her shape, and afterwards ate Little Red-Ridinghood. But the hunter
killed the wolf, cut open the belly and Little Red-Ridinghood sprang out
safe and sound. This motive is found in a great many fairy-tales,
widespread over the whole world, and it is the motive of the biblical
story of Jonah. The original significance is astro-mythological: the sun
is swallowed up by the sea, and in the morning is born again out of the
water. Of course, the whole of astro-mythology is at the root but
psychology, unconscious psychology, projected on to the heavens, for
myths have never been and are never made consciously, but arise from
man’s unconscious. For this reason, we sometimes find that marvellous,
striking similarity or identity in the forms of myths, even among races
that have been separated from each other since eternity as it were. This
explains the universal dissemination of the symbol of the cross,
perfectly independent of Christianity, of which America, as is well
known, furnishes us especially interesting instances. It is impossible
to agree, that myths have been made to explain meteorological or
astronomical processes. Myths are, first of all, manifestations of
unconscious currents, similar to dreams.[12] These currents are caused
by the libido in its unconscious forms. The material which comes to the
surface is infantile material, hence, phantasies connected with the
incest-complex. Without difficulty we can find in all the so-called
sun-myths infantile theories about generation, childbirth and incestuous
relations. In the fairy-tale of Little Red-Ridinghood, we find the
phantasy that the mother has to eat something which is similar to a
child, and that the child is born by cutting open the mother’s body.
This phantasy is one of the most universal, to be found everywhere.

We can conclude, from these universal psychological observations, that
the child, in its dream, elaborates the problem of generation and
childbirth. As to the wolf, the father probably has to be put in its
place, for the child unconsciously assigns to the father any act of
violence towards the mother. This anticipation can be based on
innumerable myths which deal with the problem of any act of violence
towards the mother. In reference to the mythological parallelism, let me
direct your attention to Boas’s collection, where you will find a
beautiful set of Indian legends; also to the work of Frobenius, “Das
Zeitaltes Sonnengottes”; and, finally, to the works of Abraham, Rank,
Riklin, Jones, Freud, Spielrein, and my own investigations in my
“Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido.”

After having made these general observations for theoretical reasons,
which, of course, were not made in the concrete case, we will go back to
see what the child has to tell in regard to her dream. Of course the
child speaks of her dream just as she likes, without being influenced in
any way whatever. The little girl begins with the bite in her leg, and
relates, that she had once been told by a woman who had had a baby, that
she could still show the place where the stork had bitten her. This mode
of expression is, in Switzerland, a universally known variant of the
symbolism of generation and birth. Here we find a perfect parallelism
between our interpretation and the associations of the child. The first
associations which have been brought by the child, without being
influenced in any way, are connected with the problem which, for
theoretical reasons, was suggested by ourselves. I know well that the
innumerable cases, published in our psychoanalytic literature, where the
patients have certainly not been influenced, have not prevented the
critics’ contention, that we suggest our own interpretations to our
patients. This case will not, therefore, convince anyone who is
determined to find crude mistakes or, much worse still—fabrications.

After our little patient had finished her first association, she was
asked, “What did the wolf suggest?” She answered, “I think of my father,
when he is angry.” This association also coincides with our theoretical
observations. It might be objected that the observation was made just
for this purpose and for nothing else, and has therefore no general
validity. I believe that this objection vanishes of itself as soon as
the corresponding psychoanalytic and mythological knowledge has been
acquired. The validity of an hypothesis can only be confirmed by
positive knowledge; otherwise it is impossible to confirm it. We have
seen by the first association that the wolf has been replaced by the
stork. The associations given to the wolf bring the father. In the
common myth, the stork stands for the father, as the father brings
children. The apparent contradiction, which could be noticed here
between the fairy-tale, where the wolf represents the mother, and the
dream, in which the wolf stands for the father, is of no importance for
the dream. I must renounce here any attempt at a detailed explanation. I
have treated this problem of bisexual symbols in the work already
referred to. You know that in the legend of Romulus and Remus, both
animals were raised to the rank of parents, the bird Picus and the wolf.

The fear of the wolf in the dream is therefore fear of her father. The
little patient explains her fear of her father by his severity towards
her. He had also told her that we only have bad dreams when we have been
doing wrong. Later, she once asked her father, “But what does Mamma do
wrong? She has very often frightful dreams.”

The father once slapped her fingers because she was sucking them. Was
this her naughtiness? Scarcely, because sucking the fingers is an
anachronistic infantile habit, of little interest at her age. It only
seems to annoy her father, for which he will punish and hit her. In this
way, she relieves her conscience of the unconfessed and much more
serious sin. It comes out, that she has induced a number of other girls
to perform mutual masturbation.

These sexual tendencies have caused the fear of the father. Still, we
must not forget that she had this dream in her fifth year. At that time
these sins had not been committed. Hence we must regard this affair with
the other girls as a reason for her present fear of her father; but that
does not explain the earlier fear. But still, we may expect it was
something of a similar nature, some unconscious sexual wish,
corresponding to the psychology of the forbidden action previously
mentioned. The moral value and character of this wish is even more
unconscious with the child than with adults. To understand what had made
an impression on the child, we have to ask what happened in her fifth
year. Her youngest brother was born at that time. Even then her father
had made her nervous. The associations previously referred to give us an
undoubted connection between her sexual inclinations and her anxiety.
The sexual problem, which nature connects with positive feelings of
delight, is in the dream brought to the surface in the form of fear,
apparently on account of the bad father, who represents moral education.
This dream illustrates the first impressive appearance of the sexual
problem, obviously suggested by the recent birth of the little brother,
just such an occasion when experience teaches us that these questions
become vital.

Just because the sexual problem is closely connected with certain
pleasurable physical sensations, which education tries to reduce and
break off, it can apparently only manifest itself hidden under the cloak
of moral anxiety as to sin. This explanation certainly seems rather
plausible, but it is superficial, it is insufficient. It attributes the
difficulties to the moral education, on the unproved assumption that
education can cause such a neurosis. We hereby leave out of
consideration the fact that there are people who have become neurotic
and suffer from morbid fears without having had a trace of moral
education. Moreover, the moral law is not merely an evil, which has to
be resisted, but a necessity, born out of the utmost needs of humanity.
The moral law is only an outward manifestation of the innate human
impulse to dominate and tame oneself. The origin of the impulse towards
domestication or civilization is lost in the unfathomable depths of the
history of evolution, and can never be conceived as the consequence of
certain laws imposed from without. Man himself, obeying his instincts,
created laws. Therefore, we shall never understand the reasons for the
repression of sexuality in the child if we only take into account the
moral influences of education. The main reasons are to be found much
deeper, in human nature itself, in its perhaps tragic contradiction
between civilization and nature, or between individual consciousness and
the general conscience of the community. I cannot enter into these
questions now; in my other work, I have tried to do so. Naturally, it
would be of no value to give a child a notion of the higher
philosophical aspects of the problem; that would probably not have the
slightest effect.

The child wants, first of all, to be relieved from the idea that she is
doing wrong in being interested in the generation of life. By the
analytic explanation of this complex it is made clear to the child how
much pleasure and curiosity she really takes in the problem of
generation, and how her groundless fear is the inversion of her
repressed desire. The affair of her masturbation meets with a tolerant
understanding and the discussion is limited to drawing the child’s
attention to the aimlessness of her action. At the same time it is
explained to her that her sexual actions are mainly the consequences of
her curiosity, which might be satisfied in a better way. Her great fear
of her father corresponds, probably, with as great an expectation,
which, in consequence of the birth of her little brother, is closely
connected with the problem of generation. Through this explanation, the
child is declared to be justified in her curiosity and the greater part
of her moral conflict is eliminated.

Fourth Interview. The little girl is now much nicer and much more
confiding. Her former unnatural and constrained manner has vanished. She
brings a dream which she dreamed after the last sitting. It runs: “_I am
as tall as a church-tower and can see into every house. At my feet are
very small children, as small as flowers are. A policeman comes. I say
to him, ‘If you dare to make any remark, I shall take your sword and cut
off your head.’”_

In the analysis of this dream she makes the following remarks: “I would
like to be taller than my father, for then he will have to obey me.” The
first association with policeman was father. He is a military man and
has, of course, a sword. The dream clearly fulfils her wish. In the form
of a tower, she is much bigger than her father, and if he dares to make
a remark, he will be decapitated. The dream fulfils the natural wish of
the child to be a grown-up person, and to have children playing at her
feet, symbolized in the dream by the small children. With this dream she
overcomes her great fear of her father; that means an important
improvement with regard to her personal freedom, and her certainty of
feeling.

But incidentally there is here also a theoretical gain; we may consider
this dream to be a clear example of the compensating and teleological
function of dreams which was especially pointed out by Maeder. Such a
dream must leave with the dreamer an increased sense of the value of her
own personality, which is of much importance for personal well-being. It
does not matter that the symbols of the dream are not perceived by the
consciousness of the child, as conscious perception is not necessary to
derive from symbols their corresponding emotional effect. We have to do
here with knowledge derived from intuition; in other words, it is that
kind of perception on which at all times the effect produced by
religious symbols has depended. Here no conscious understanding has been
needed; the feelings are affected by means of emotional intuition.

Fifth Interview. In the fifth sitting, the child brings a dream which
she had dreamt meanwhile. “_I am with my whole family on the roof. The
windows of the houses on the other side of the valley radiate like fire.
The rising sun is reflected. Suddenly I notice that the house at the
corner of our street is, as a fact, on fire. The fire comes nearer and
nearer; at last our house is also on fire. I take flight into the street
and my mother throws several things to me. I hold out my apron, and
among other things my doll is thrown to me. I notice that the stones of
our house are burning, but the wood remains untouched._”

The analysis of this dream presents peculiar difficulties and therefore
required two sittings. It would lead me too far to sketch to you all the
material this dream brought forth. I have to limit myself to what is
most necessary. The associations which deal with the real meaning of the
dream belong to the remarkable image which tells us that the stones of
the house are on fire, while the wood remains untouched. It is sometimes
worth while, especially with longer dreams, to take out the most
striking parts and to analyze them first. This proceeding is not the
typical one, but it is justified by the practical desire to shorten
matters. The little patient makes the observation that this part of the
dream is like a fairy-tale. Through examples it was made plain to her
that fairy-tales always have a meaning. She objects: “But not all
fairy-tales have one. For instance, the tale of the Sleeping Beauty.
What could that mean?” The explanation was as follows: “The Sleeping
Beauty had to wait for one hundred years in an enchanted sleep until she
could be freed. Only he who was able to overcome all the difficulties
through love, and had the courage to break through the thorny hedge, was
able to deliver her. So one must often wait a long while to obtain what
one longs for.”

This explanation is as much in harmony with the capacity of childish
understanding, as it is perfectly consonant with the history of the
motive of this fairy-tale. The motive of the Sleeping Beauty shows
clearly its relation to an ancient myth of Spring and fertility, and
contains at the same time a problem which has a remarkably close
affinity to the psychological situation of the precocious girl of
eleven.

This motive of the Sleeping Beauty belongs to a whole cycle of legends
in which a virgin, closely guarded by a dragon, is delivered by a hero.
Without entering into the interpretation of this myth, I want to bring
into prominence the astronomical or meteorological components which are
very clearly demonstrated in the Edda. In the form of a virgin, the
Earth is kept prisoner by the winter, covered in ice and snow. The young
Spring-Sun, in the form of a hero, delivers her out of her frosty
prison, where she has been longing for her deliverer.

The association given by the little girl was chosen by her simply to
give an example of a fairy-tale without a meaning, and was not, in the
first place, conceived as having any relation with the house on fire. To
this part of the dream, she only made the observation: “It is quite
marvellous, just like a fairy-tale.” She meant to say it was impossible,
as the idea of burning stones is to her something impossible, some
nonsense, or something like a fairy-tale. The observation made a propos
of this shows her that an impossibility and a fairy-tale are only partly
identical, since a fairy-tale certainly has much meaning. Although this
particular fairy-tale, from the casual way in which it was mentioned,
seemed to have no apparent relation to the dream, we have to pay special
attention to it, as it was given spontaneously in the course of the
interpretation of the dream. The unconscious suggested this example,
which cannot be accidental, but must be in some way significant for the
present situation. In interpreting dreams we have to pay attention to
such apparent accidents, since in psychology we find no blind chances,
much as we are inclined to think these things accidental. From the
critics, you may hear this objection as often as you like, but for a
really scientific mind there are only causal relationships and no
accidents. From the fact that the little girl chose the example of the
Sleeping Beauty we may conclude that there was some fundamental reason
underlying this in the psychology of the child. This reason is a
comparison, or partial identification, of herself with the Sleeping
Beauty; in other words, there is in the soul of the child a complex,
which manifests itself in the form of the motive of the Sleeping Beauty.
The explanation, which I mentioned before, which was given to the child,
was in harmony with this conclusion.

Notwithstanding she is not quite satisfied, and doubts that all
fairy-tales have a meaning. She brings another instance of a fairy-tale,
that cannot be understood. She brings the story of little Snow-White,
who, in the sleep of death, lies enclosed in a coffin of glass. It is
not difficult to see that this fairy-tale belongs to the same kind of
myths to which the Sleeping Beauty belongs. The story of little
Snow-White in her glass-coffin is at the same time very remarkable in
regard to the myth of the seasons. This mythical material chosen by the
little girl has reference to an intuitive comparison with the earth,
held fast by the winter’s cold, awaiting the liberating sun of spring.

This second example affirms the first one and its explanation. It would
be difficult to pretend here that this second example, which accentuates
the meaning of the first, has been suggested by the explanation given.
The fact that the little girl brought up the story of little Snow-White,
as another example of the senselessness of fairy-tales, proves that she
did not understand her identification with little Snow-White and the
Sleeping Beauty. Therefore we may expect that little Snow-White arose
from the same unconscious sources as the Sleeping Beauty, that is, a
complex consisting of the expectation of coming events, which are
altogether comparable with the deliverance of the earth from the prison
of winter and its fertilization through the sunbeams of spring.

As may, perhaps, be known, the symbol of the bull has been given from
time immemorial to the fertile spring sun, as the bull embodies the
mightiest procreative power. Although without further consideration, it
is not easy to find any relation between the insight indirectly gained
and the dream, we will hold to what we have found and proceed with the
dream. The next part described by the little girl is receiving the doll
in her apron. The first association given tells us that her attitude and
the whole situation in the dream is like a picture very well known to
her, representing a stork flying above a village; children are in the
street, holding their aprons, looking up and shouting to him; the stork
must bring them a little baby. The little patient adds the observation
that several times she wished to have a little brother or sister
herself. This material, given spontaneously by the child, stands in a
clear and valuable relationship to the motive of the myths. We notice
here that the dream is indeed concerned with the problem of the
awakening instinct of generation. Nothing of this has been said to the
little girl. After a little pause, she brings, abruptly, this
association: “Once, when I was five years old, I thought I was in the
street and that a bicyclist passed over my stomach.” This highly
improbable story proved to be, as it might be expected, a phantasy,
which had become a paramnesia. Nothing of this kind had ever happened,
but we came to know that at school the little girls lay cross-wise over
each other’s bodies, and trampled with their legs.

Whoever has read the analyses of children published by Freud and myself
will observe the same “leit-motif” of trampling; to this must be
attributed a sexual undercurrent. This conception demonstrated in our
former work agrees with the next association of our little patient: “I
should prefer a real child to a doll.”

This most remarkable material brought by the child in connection with
the phantasy of the stork, refers to typical childish attempts at the
sexual theory, and betrays where we have to look for the actual
phantasies of the child.

It is of interest to know, that this “motive of trampling” can be
illustrated through mythology. I have brought together the proofs in my
work on the libido theory. The utilization of these early infantile
phantasies in the dream, the existence of the paramnesia of the
bicyclist, and the expectation expressed by the motive of the Sleeping
Beauty show that the interests of the child dwell chiefly on certain
problems which must be solved. Probably the fact that the libido has
been attracted by the problem of generation has been the reason of her
lack of attention at school, through which she fell behind. This problem
is very often seen in girls between the ages of twelve and thirteen. I
could demonstrate this to you by some special cases published under the
title of “Beitrag zur Psychologie des Gerüchtes” in the Zentralblatt für
Psychoanalyse. The frequent occurrence of the problem at this age is the
cause of the indecent talk among all sorts of children and the attempts
at mutual enlightenment, which are naturally far from beautiful, and
which so very often spoil the child’s imagination. Not the most careful
protection can prevent children from some day discovering the great
secret, and then probably in the dirtiest way. Therefore it would be
much better if children could learn about certain important secrets of
life in a clean way and at suitable times, so that they would not need
to be enlightened by their playmates, too often in very ugly ways.

In the eighth interview the little girl began by remarking that she had
understood perfectly why it was still impossible for her to have a child
and therefore she had renounced all idea of it. But she does not make a
good impression this time. We get to know that she has told her teacher
a falsehood. She had been late to school, and told her teacher that she
was late because she was obliged to accompany her father. But in
reality, she had been lazy, got up too late and was thus late for
school. She told a lie, and was afraid of losing the teacher’s favor by
telling the truth. This sudden moral defect in our little patient
requires an explanation. According to the fundamentals of
psychoanalysis, this sudden and striking weakness can only follow from
the patient’s not drawing the logical consequences from the analysis but
rather looking for other easier possibilities.

In other words, we have to do here with a case in which the analysis
brought the libido apparently to the surface, so that an improvement of
the personality could have occurred. But for some reason or other, the
adaptation was not made, and the libido returned to its former
regressive paths.

The ninth interview proved that this was indeed the case. Our patient
withheld an important piece of evidence in her ideas of sexuality, and
one which contradicted the psychoanalytic explanation of sexual
maturity. She suppressed the rumor current in the school that a girl of
eleven had a baby with a boy of the same age. This rumor was proved to
be based on no facts, but was a phantasy, fulfiling the secret wishes of
this age. Rumors appear often to originate in this kind of way, as I
tried to show in the above-mentioned demonstration of such a case. They
serve to give vent to the unconscious phantasies, and in fulfiling this
function correspond to dreams as well as to myths. This rumor keeps
another way open: she need not wait so long, it is possible to have a
child even at eleven. The contradiction between the accepted rumor and
the analytic explanation creates resistances towards the analysis, so
that it is forthwith depreciated. All the other statements and
information fall to the ground at the same time; for the time being,
doubt and a feeling of uncertainty have taken their place. The libido
has again taken possession of its former ways, it has made a regression.
This is the moment of the relapse.

The tenth sitting added important details to the story of her sexual
problem. First came a remarkable fragment of a dream: “_I am with other
children in an open field in the wood, surrounded by beautiful pine
trees. It begins to rain, to lighten and to thunder. It is growing dark.
Suddenly I see a stork in the air._”

Before I enter into an analysis of this dream, I should like to point
out its beautiful parallel with certain mythological presentations. This
astonishing coincidence of thunderstorm and stork has, of course, to
those acquainted with the works of Adalbert Kuhn and Steinthal nothing
remarkable. The thunderstorm has had, from ancient times, the meaning of
the fertilizing of the earth, the cohabitation of the father Heaven and
the mother Earth, to which Abraham[13] has recently again called
attention, in which the lightning takes the place of the winged phallus.
The stork is just the same thing, a winged phallus, the psychosexual
meaning of which is known to every child. But the psychosexual meaning
of the thunderstorm is not known to everyone. In view of the
psychological situation just described, we must attribute to the stork a
psychosexual meaning. That the thunderstorm is connected with the stork
and has also a psychosexual meaning, seems at first scarcely acceptable.
But when we remember that psychoanalytic observation has shown an
enormous number of mythological associations with the unconscious mental
images, we may suppose that some psychosexual meaning is also present in
this case. We know from other experiences that those unconscious strata
which, in former times, produced mythological forms, are still in action
among modern people and are still incessantly productive. But this
production is limited to the realm of dreams and the symptomatology of
the neuroses and the psychoses, for the correction, through reality, is
so much increased in the modern mind that it prevents their projection
into reality.

We will return to the dream analysis. The associations which lead us to
the heart of this image begin with the idea of rain during the
thunderstorm. Her actual words were: “I think of water. My uncle was
drowned in water—it must be dreadful to be kept under water, so in the
dark. But the child must be also drowned in the water. Does it drink the
water that is in the stomach? It is very strange, when I was ill Mamma
sent my water to the doctor. I thought perhaps he would mix something
with it, perhaps some syrup, out of which children grow. I think one has
to drink it.”

With unquestionable clearness we see from this set of associations that
even the child associates psychosexual, and even typical ideas of
fructification with the rain during the thunderstorm.

Here again, we see that marvellous parallelism between mythology and the
individual phantasies of our own day. This series of associations
contains such an abundance of symbolic relationships, that we could
easily write a whole dissertation about it. The child herself splendidly
interpreted the symbolism of drowning as a pregnancy-phantasy, an
explanation given long ago in psychoanalytic literature.

Eleventh interview. The next sitting was occupied with the spontaneous
infantile theories about fructification and child-birth. The child
thought that the urine of the man went into the body of the woman, and
from this the embryo would grow. Hence the child was in the water from
the beginning, that is to say, in urine. Another version was, the urine
was drunk in the doctor’s syrup, so that the child would grow in the
head. The head had then to be split open, to help the growth of the
child, and one wore hats to cover this up. She illustrated this by a
little drawing, representing a child-birth through the head. The child
again had still a smaller child on the head, and so on. This is an
archaic idea and highly mythological. I would remind you of the birth of
Pallas, who came out of the father’s head.

We find striking mythological proofs of the fertilizing significance of
the urine in the songs of Rudra in the Rigveda. Here should be mentioned
something the mother added, that once the little girl, before analysis,
suggested she saw a puppet on the head of her little brother, a phantasy
with which the origin of this theory of child-birth might be connected.
The little illustration made by the patient has remarkable affinity with
certain pictures found among the Bataks of Dutch India. They are the
so-called magic wands or ancestral statues, on which the members of
families are represented, one standing on the top of the other. The
explanation of these wands, given by the Bataks themselves, and regarded
as nonsense, has a marvellous analogy with the infantile mental
attitude. Schultz, who wrote about these wands, says: “The assertion,
that these figures represent the members of a family who have committed
incest, were bitten by a snake, entwined with another, and met a common
death in their criminal embrace, is widely disseminated and obviously
due to the position of the figures.”

The explanation has a parallel in our presuppositions as to our little
patient. We saw from the first dream that her sexual phantasy centers
round the father; the psychological condition is here the same as with
the Bataks, being found in the idea of incestuous relationship.

Still a third version is the growth of the child in the intestinal
canal. The child tried several times to provoke nausea and vomiting, in
accordance with her phantasy that the child is born through vomiting. In
the closet she had arranged also pressure-exercises, in order to press
out the child. Under these circumstances, we cannot be astonished that
the first and principal symptoms of the manifest neurosis were
nausea-symptoms.

We have come so far with our analysis that we are now able to throw a
glance over the case as a whole.

We found, behind the neurotic symptoms, complicated emotional processes,
which were undoubtedly connected with the symptoms. If it may be allowed
to draw some general conclusions from this limited material, we could
construct the course of the neurosis in the following way.

At the gradual approach of puberty, the libido of the child assumed
rather an emotional than a practical attitude towards reality. She began
to be very much taken with her teacher, but the sentimental
self-indulgence, evinced in her riotous phantasies, played a greater
part than the thought of the increased endeavors which such love ought
really to have demanded of her. For this reason, her attention and her
work left much to be desired. The former pleasant relationship with her
favorite teacher was troubled. The teacher was annoyed, and the little
girl, who had been made somewhat conceited by her home-conditions, was
resentful, instead of trying to improve in her work. In consequence her
libido withdrew from her teacher, as well as from her work, and fell
into the characteristic forced dependence on the little boy, who on his
side made the most of the situation. Then the resistances against school
seized the first opportunity, which was suggested by the case of the
little girl who had to be sent home on account of sickness. Our little
patient followed this child’s example. Once away from school, the way
was open to her phantasies. By the regression of the libido, these
symptom-making phantasies became awakened to a real activity, and were
given an importance they had never had before, for they had never
previously played such an important part. Now they become apparently of
much importance and seemed to be the very reason why the libido
regressed to them. It might be said that the child, in consequence of
its essentially phantasy-building nature, saw her father too much in her
teacher, and thus developed incestuous resistances towards the latter.
As I have already stated, I hold that it is simpler and more probable to
accept the view that, during a certain period, it was convenient for her
to see the teacher as the father. As she preferred to follow the hidden
presentiments of puberty rather than her duties towards the school and
her teacher, she allowed her libido to fall on the little boy, from
whom, as we saw, she awaited some mysterious advantages. Even if
analysis had demonstrated it as a fact that she had had incestuous
resistances against her teacher on account of the transference of the
father-image, those resistances would only have been secondary
phantasies, that had become inflated. At any rate, indolence would still
have been the primum movens. In the analysis she learned about the two
ways of life, the way of phantasy, of regression, and the way of
reality, wherein lay her present child’s duties. In her the two were
dissociated, and consequently she was at strife with herself. As the
analysis was adapted to the regressive tendency of the libido, the
existence of an extreme sexual curiosity, connected with certain very
definite problems, was discovered. The libido, imprisoned in this
phantastical labyrinth, was brought back into useful application by
means of the psychological explanation of the incorrect infantile
phantasies. The child thus got an insight into her own attitude towards
reality with all its possibilities. The result was that she was able to
take an objective-critical attitude towards her immature
puberty-desires, and was able to give up these and all other
impossibilities in favor of the use of her libido in possible
directions, in her work and in obtaining the good-will of her teacher.
In this case, analysis brought great peace of mind, as well as a
pronounced intellectual improvement. After a short time her teacher
himself stated that the little girl was one of the best pupils in her
class.

I hope that by the exposition of this brief instance of the course of an
analysis, I have succeeded in giving you an insight not only into the
concrete procedure of treatment, and into the technical difficulties,
but no less into the beauty of the human mind and its endless problems.
I intentionally brought into prominence the parallelism with mythology,
to indicate the universally possible applications of psychoanalysis. At
the same time, I should like to refer to the further importance of this
position. We may see in the predominance of the mythological in the mind
of a child, a distinct hint of the gradual development of the individual
mind out of the collective knowledge or the collective feeling of
earliest childhood, which gave rise to the old theory of a condition of
perfect knowledge before and after individual existence.

In the same way we might see, in the marvellous analogy between the
phantasies of dementia præcox and mythological symbolisms, a reason for
the widespread superstition that an insane person is possessed of a
demon, and has some divine knowledge.

With these hints, I have reached the present standpoint of
investigation, and I have at least sketched those facts and working
hypotheses which are characteristic for my present and future work.

Footnote 11:

  “Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido,” Wien, 1912.

Footnote 12:

  Abraham, “Dreams and Myths,” No. 15 of the Monograph Series.

Footnote 13:

  “Dreams and Myths,” No. 15 of the Monograph Series.




                                 INDEX


 Abreagieren, 5

 Actual conflict, 92, 93

 Actual present, 81

 Adaptation, failure of, 83

 Amnesia, infantile, 78

 Analysis of dreams, 60, 109

 Analysis of transference, 105

 Association-experiment, 66


 Breuer, 5


 Cathartic method, 6

 Change in the theory of psychoanalysis, 5

 Charcot, 5

 Child, neurosis in, 113

 Childhood, sexual trauma in, 10

 Complex, Electra, 69

 Complex, Oedipus, 67

 Complex, incest, 70

 Complex of the parents, 50

 Conception of libido, 27

 Conception of sensitiveness, 89

 Conception of sexuality, 19

 Conception of transference, 102

 Confession and psychoanalysis, 103

 Conflict, actual, 92, 93

 Content of the unconscious, 67

 Criticism, 1

 Criticized, infantile sexual etiology, 46


 Dementia præcox, 111

 Dementia præcox, libido in, 35

 Dream analysis, 60, 109

 Dream, the, 60

 Dreams, teleological meaning of, 109


 Early hypothesis, 4

 Electra-complex, 69

 Energic theory of libido, 28

 Environment and predisposition, 9

 Etiology of the neuroses, 72, 80


 Failure of adaptation, 83

 Finger, sucking of, 22

 Freud, 5


 Genetic conception of libido, 38


 Hypothesis, early, 4


 Incest-complex, 70

 Infancy, the polymorphic sexuality of, 24

 Infantile amnesia, 78

 Infantile mental attitude, 53

 Infantile perversity, 43

 Infantile reaction, 84

 Infantile sexuality, 17

 Infantile sexual etiology criticized, 46

 Infantile sexual phantasy, 15

 Introversion, 49


 Latent sexual period, 79

 Libido, 26, 27

 Libido in dementia præcox, 35

 Libido, energic theory of, 28

 Libido, genetic conception of, 38

 Libido, regression of, 76

 Libido, the sexual definition, 34

 Life, three phases of, 33

 Little Red-Ridinghood, 119


 Masturbation, 22

 Method, cathartic, 6


 Naughtiness, 121

 Neurosis in a child, 113

 Neuroses, etiology of, 72, 80

 Nucleus-complex, 50


 Objections to the sexual hypothesis, 18

 Oedipus-complex, 67


 Perversity, infantile, 43

 Phantasy criticized, 94

 Phantasy, infantile sexual, 17

 Phantasy, unconscious, 29, 53

 Polymorphic perverse sexuality of infancy, 24

 Pragmatic rule, 2

 Predisposition and environment, 9

 Predisposition for the trauma, 12

 Present, actual, 81

 Problem of self-analysis, 108

 Psychoanalysis and confession, 103

 Psychoanalysis, remarks on, 111

 Psychoanalysis, therapeutic principles of, 96

 Psychopathology of everyday life, 65


 Regression of the libido, 76

 Regression and sensitiveness, 90

 Remarks on psychoanalysis, 111

 Repression, 8

 Robert Mayer, 28

 Romulus and Remus, 120


 Schopenhauer’s will, 39

 Self-analysis, problem of, 108

 Sensitiveness, conception of, 89

 Sensitiveness and regression, 90

 Sexual definition of libido, 34

 Sexual element in the trauma, 14

 Sexual period, latent, 79

 Sexual hypothesis, objections to, 18

 Sexual trauma in childhood, 10

 Sexuality, the conception of, 19

 Sexuality, infantile, 17

 Sexuality of the suckling, 21

 Sexual terminology, 30

 Sleeping Beauty, 124

 Snow-White, 125

 Spring-Sun, 124

 Stork, 129

 Sucking the finger, 22

 Suckling, sexuality of, 21

 Symbolism, 112


 Teleological meaning of dreams, 109

 Terminology, sexual, 30

 The dream, 60

 Theory, change in, 5

 Theory criticized, traumatic, 7

 Theory, traumatic, 5, 48

 Therapeutic principles of psychoanalysis, 96

 Three contributions to the sexual theory, 17

 Three phases of life, 33

 Thunderstorm, 129

 Transference, analysis of, 105

 Transference, conception of, 102

 Trauma, predisposition for, 12

 Trauma, sexual element in, 14

 Traumatic theory, 5, 48

 Traumatic theory criticized, 7


 Unconscious, 55

 Unconscious, content of, 67

 Unconscious phantasy, 29, 53




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).
    ○ Footnotes have been moved to follow the chapters in which they are
      referenced.


        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THEORY OF PSYCHOANALYSIS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of Collected Papers on Analytical Psychology
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Collected Papers on Analytical Psychology


Author: C. G. Jung

Editor: Constance E. Long

Release date: February 10, 2015 [eBook #48225]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Sami Sieranoja, Jane Robins and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLECTED PAPERS ON ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY ***



Produced by Sami Sieranoja, Jane Robins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)










    COLLECTED PAPERS ON
    ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY




    COLLECTED PAPERS
    ON
    ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY

    BY

    C. G. JUNG, M.D., LL.D.,

    FORMERLY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF ZÜRICH.

    AUTHORISED TRANSLATION

    EDITED BY DR. CONSTANCE E. LONG,

    MEDICAL OFFICER, EDUCATION BOARD; MEMBER ADVISORY COMMITTEE INSURANCE
    ACT; EX-PRESIDENT ASSOCIATION OF REGISTERED MEDICAL WOMEN, ETC.

    SECOND EDITION (REPRINTED)

    [Illustration]

    LONDON

    BAILLIÈRE, TINDALL AND COX

    8, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN

    1920

    [_All rights reserved_]


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN.




EDITOR'S PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION


The following papers have been gathered together from various sources,
and are now available for the first time to English readers. The subject
of psychoanalysis is much in evidence, and is likely to occupy still
more attention in the near future, as the psychological content of the
psychoses and neuroses is more generally appreciated and understood.
It is of importance, therefore, that the fundamental writings of both
the Viennese and Zürich Schools should be accessible for study. Several
of Freud's works have already been translated into English. Dr. Jung's
"Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido" was published in America in 1916
under the title of "The Psychology of the Unconscious." That work, read
in conjunction with these papers, offers a fairly complete picture of
the scientific and philosophic standpoint of the leader of the Zürich
School. It is the task of the future to judge and expand the findings
of both schools, and to work at the development of the new psychology,
which is still in its infancy.

It will be a relief to many students of the unconscious to see it in
another aspect than that of "a wild beast couched, waiting its hour to
spring." Some readers have gathered that view of it from the writings
of the Viennese School, a view which is at most that dangerous thing "a
half-truth."

In the papers appearing for the first time in this edition (Chapters
XIV. and XV.), Dr. Jung develops his ideas of introversion and
extroversion, a contribution of the first importance to psychology.
He agrees with Freud in regarding the neuroses to be the result of
repression, but differs in his view as to the origin of repression.
He finds this to lie not in sexuality _per se_, but rather in man's
natural tendency to adapt to the demands of life one-sidedly, according
to his type of mentality. The born extrovert adapts by means of
feeling, thought being under repression and relatively infantile. The
introvert's natural adaptation is by means of thought; feeling being
more or less repressed remains undeveloped. In either type the neglected
co-function is behind the adapted function. This inequality operating
in the unconscious, brings about a conflict, which in certain subjects
amounts to a neurosis, and in others produces a limitation of individual
development. This view shifts the interpretation of repression on to a
much more comprehensive basis than that of sexuality, although there can
scarcely be a repression that does not include this instinct on account
of its deep and far-reaching importance in man.

There is no doubt that some even scientific persons have a certain
fear of whither the study of the unconscious may lead. These fearful
persons should be reminded that they possess an unconscious in spite of
themselves, and that they share it in common with every human being. It
is an extension of the individual. To study it is to deepen the self.
All new discoveries have at one stage been called dangerous, and all new
philosophies have been deemed heresies. It is as though we would once
more consign radium to its dust-heaps, lest some day the new radiancy
should over-power mankind. Indeed this particular thing has proved
at once most dangerous and most precious. Man must learn to use his
treasure, and in using it to _submit to its own laws_, which can only
become known when it is handled and investigated.

Those who read this book with the attention it requires, will find they
gain an impression of many new truths. The second edition is issued
towards the end of the third year of the Great European war, at a time
when much we have valued and held sacred is in the melting-pot. But
we believe that out of the crucible new forms will arise. The study
of psychoanalysis produces something of the effect of a war in the
psyche; indeed, we need to make conscious this war in the inner things
of the mind and soul if we would be delivered in the future from war
in the external world. There is a parallelism between individual and
international neurosis. In the pain of the upheaval, one recognises the
birth-pangs of newer, and let us hope, truer thought, and more natural
adaptations. We need a renewal of our philosophy of life to replace much
that has perished in the general cataclysm, and it is because I see in
the analytical psychology, which grows out of a scientific study of the
unconscious, the germs of such a new construction, that I have gathered
the following essays together. The translation is the work of various
hands, the names of the different translators being given in a footnote
at the beginning of each essay; for the editing I am responsible. The
essays are, as far as possible, printed in chronological order, and
those readers who are sufficiently interested will be able to discern
in them the gradual development of Dr. Jung's present position in
psychoanalysis.

    CONSTANCE E. LONG.

    2, HARLEY PLACE, W.
    _June, 1917_.




AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION


In agreement with my honoured collaborator, Dr. C. E. Long, I have
made certain additions to the second edition. It should especially be
mentioned that a new chapter upon "The Concept of the Unconscious" has
been added. This is a lecture I gave early in 1916 before the Zürich
Union for Analytical Psychology. It gives a general orientation of a
most important problem in practical analysis, viz. of the relation
of the psychological ego to the psychological non-ego. Chapter XIV.
has been fundamentally altered, and I have used the opportunity to
incorporate an article that should describe the results of more recent
researches. In accordance with my usual mode of working, the description
is as generalised as possible. My habit in my daily practical work is
to confine myself for some time to studying my human material. I then
abstract as generalised a formula as possible from the data collected,
obtaining from it a point of view and applying it in my practical work,
until it has either been confirmed, modified, or else abandoned. If
it has been confirmed, I publish it as a general view-point, without
giving the empirical material. I only introduce the material amassed
in the course of my practice in the form of example or illustration. I
therefore beg the reader not to consider the views I present as mere
fabrications of my brain. They are, as a matter of fact, the results of
extensive experience and ripe reflection.

These additions will enable the reader of the second edition to become
familiar with the recent views of the Zürich School.

As regards the criticism encountered by the first edition of this
work, I was pleased to find my writings were received with much more
open-mindedness among English critics than was the case in Germany,
where they are met with the silence born of contempt. I am particularly
grateful to Dr. Agnes Savill for an exceptionally understanding
criticism in the _Medical Press_. My thanks are also due to Dr. T. W.
Mitchell for an exhaustive review in the _Proceedings of the Society for
Psychical Research_. This critic takes exception to my heresy respecting
causality. He considers that I am entering upon a perilous, because
unscientific, course, when I question the sole validity of the causal
view-point in psychology. I sympathise with him, but in my opinion the
nature of the human mind compels us to take the final point of view.
For it cannot be disputed that, psychologically speaking, we are living
and working, day by day, according to the principle of directed aim
or purpose, as well as that of causality. A psychological theory must
necessarily adapt itself to this fact. What is plainly directed towards
a goal cannot be given an exclusively causalistic explanation, otherwise
we should be led to the conclusion expressed in Moleschott's famous
enunciation: "Man _is_, what he eats." We must always bear the fact in
mind that _causality is a point of view_. It affirms the inevitable and
immutable relation of a series of events: a-b-d-z. Since this relation
is fixed, and according to the view-point must necessarily be so,
looked at logically the order may also be reversed. _Finality is also
a view-point_, that is justified empirically solely by the existence
of series of events, wherein the causal connection is indeed evident,
_but the meaning of which only becomes intelligible as producing final
effect_. Ordinary daily life furnishes the best instances of this. The
causal explanation must be mechanistic, if we are not to postulate a
metaphysical entity as first cause. For instance, if we adopt Freud's
sexual theory and assign primary importance psychologically to the
function of the genital glands, the brain is viewed as an appendage of
the genital glands. If we approach the Viennese idea of sexuality with
all its vague omnipotence, and trace it in a strictly scientific manner
down to its psychological basis, we shall arrive at the first cause,
according to which psychic life is for the most, or the most important
part, tension and relaxation of the genital glands. If we assume for the
moment that this mechanistic explanation be "true," it would be the sort
of truth which is exceptionally tiresome and rigidly limited in scope.
A similar statement would be that the genital glands cannot function
without adequate _nourishment_, with its inference that sexuality is an
appendage-function of nutrition! The truth contained in this is really
an important chapter in the biology of lower forms of life.

But if we wish to work in a really psychological way, we shall want
to know the _meaning_ of psychological phenomena. After learning the
kinds of steel the various parts of a locomotive are made of, and from
what ironworks and mines they come, we do not really know anything
about the locomotive's _function_, that is to say, its _meaning_. But
"function" as conceived by modern science is by no means solely a
causal concept; it is especially a final or "teleological" one. For it
is utterly impossible to consider the soul from the causal view-point
only; we are obliged to consider it also from the final point of view.
As Dr. Mitchell also points out, it is impossible for us to think of the
causal determination conjointly with a final connection. That would be
an obvious contradiction. But our theory of cognition does not need to
remain on a pre-Kantian level. It is well known that Kant showed very
clearly that the mechanistic and the teleological view-points are not
_constituent_ (objective) principles, in some degree qualities of the
object, but that they are purely _regulative_ (subjective) principles
of thought, and as such they are not mutually inconsistent. I can, for
example, easily conceive the following thesis and antithesis:--

     _Thesis_: Everything came into existence according to
     mechanistic laws.

     _Antithesis_: Some things did not come into existence
     according to mechanistic laws only.

Kant says to this: Reason cannot prove either of these principles,
because _a priori_ purely empirical laws of nature cannot give us a
determinative principle regarding the potentiality of things.

As a matter of fact, modern physics has necessarily been converted from
the idea of pure mechanism to the final concept of the conservation of
energy, because the mechanistic explanation only recognises reversible
processes, whereas the actual truth is that the process of nature is
irreversible. This fact led to the concept of an energy that tends
towards relief of tension, and therewith also towards a definite final
state.

Obviously, I consider both these points of view necessary, the causal as
well as the final, but would at the same time lay stress upon the fact
that since Kant's time we have come to know that the two view-points
are not antagonistic if they are regarded as regulative principles of
thought, and not as constituent principles of the process of nature
itself.

When speaking of the reviews, I must also mention those that seem to
me beside the mark. I was once more struck by the fact that certain
critics cannot distinguish between the theoretical explanation given by
the author, and the phantastic ideas provided by the patient. One of
my critics makes this confusion when discussing "Number Dreams." The
associations to the quotation from the Bible in Chapter V. are, as every
attentive reader must readily perceive, not arbitrary explanations of
my own, but a cryptomnesic conglomeration emanating, not from my brain
at all, but from that of the patient. Surely it is not difficult to
perceive upon reflection that this conglomeration of numbers corresponds
exactly to that unconscious psychological function from which proceeded
all the mysticism of numbers, Pythagoric, Kabbalistic, and so forth,
existent from untold ages.

I am grateful to my serious reviewers, and should like here to also
express my thanks to Mrs. Harold F. McCormick for her generous help in
the production of this book.

    C. G. JUNG.

    _June, 1917._




AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION


This volume contains a selection of articles and pamphlets on analytical
psychology written at intervals during the past fourteen years. These
years have seen the development of a new discipline, and as is usual in
such a case, have involved many changes of view-point, of concept, and
of formulation.

It is not my intention to give a presentation of the fundamental
concepts of analytical psychology in this book; it throws some
light, however, on a certain line of development which is especially
characteristic of the Zürich School of psychoanalysis.

As is well known, the merit of the discovery of the new analytical
method of general psychology belongs to Professor Freud of Vienna. His
original view-points had to undergo many essential modifications, some
of them owing to the work done at Zürich, in spite of the fact that he
himself is far from agreeing with the standpoint of this school.

I am unable to explain fully the fundamental differences between the
two schools, but would indicate the following points: The Vienna School
takes the standpoint of an exclusive sexualistic conception, while
that of the Zürich School is symbolistic. The Vienna School interprets
the psychological symbol semiotically, as a sign or token of certain
primitive psychosexual processes. Its method is analytical and causal.

The Zürich School recognises the scientific feasibility of such a
conception, but denies its exclusive validity, for it does not interpret
the psychological symbol semiotically only, but also symbolistically,
that is, it attributes a positive value to the symbol.

The value does not depend merely on historical causes; its chief
importance lies in the fact that it has a meaning for the actual
present, and for the future, in their psychological aspects. For to the
Zürich School the symbol is not merely a sign of something repressed and
concealed, but is at the same time an attempt to comprehend and to point
out the way of the further psychological development of the individual.
Thus we add a prospective import to the retrospective value of the
symbol.

The method of the Zürich School is therefore not only analytical and
causal, but also synthetic and prospective, in recognition that the
human mind is characterised by "causæ" and also by "fines" (aims). The
latter fact needs particular emphasis, because there are two types of
psychology, the one following the principle of hedonism, and the other
following the principle of power. Scientific materialism is pertinent
to the former type, and the philosophy of Nietzsche to the latter. The
principle of the Freudian theory is hedonism, while that of Adler (one
of Freud's earliest personal pupils) is founded upon the principle of
power.

The Zürich School, recognising the existence of these two types (also
remarked by the late Professor William James), considers that the views
of Freud and Adler are one-sided, and only valid within the limits of
their corresponding type. Both principles exist within every individual,
but not in equal proportions.

Thus, it is obvious that each psychological symbol has two aspects, and
should be interpreted according to the two principles. Freud and Adler
interpret in the analytical and causal way, reducing to the infantile
and primitive. Thus with Freud the conception of the "aim" is the
fulfilment of desire, with Adler it is the usurpation of power. Both
authors take the standpoint in their practical analytical work which
brings to view only infantile and gross egoistic aims.

The Zürich School is convinced of the fact that within the limits of
a diseased mental attitude the psychology is such as Freud and Adler
describe. It is, indeed, just on account of such impossible and childish
psychology that the individual is in a state of inward dissociation and
hence neurotic. The Zürich School, therefore, in agreement with them so
far, also reduces the psychological symbol (the phantasy products of
the patient) to the fundamental infantile hedonism, or to the infantile
desire for power. But Freud and Adler content themselves with the
result of mere reduction, according to their scientific biologism and
naturalism.

But here a very important question arises. Can man obey the fundamental
and primitive impulses of his nature without gravely injuring himself
or his fellow beings? He cannot assert either his sexual desire or
his desire for power unlimitedly, and the limits are moreover very
restricted. The Zürich School has in view also the final result
of analysis, and regards the fundamental thoughts and impulses
of the unconscious, as symbols, indicative of a definite line of
future development. We must admit there is, however, _no scientific
justification_ for such a procedure, because our present-day science is
based as a whole upon causality. But causality is only one principle,
and psychology essentially cannot be exhausted by causal methods
only, because the mind lives by aims as well. Besides this disputable
philosophical argument, we have another of much greater value in favour
of our hypothesis, namely, that of _vital necessity_. It is impossible
to live according to the intimations of infantile hedonism, or according
to a childish desire for power. If these are to be retained they must be
taken symbolically. Out of the symbolic application of infantile trends,
an attitude evolves which may be termed philosophic or religious, and
these terms characterise sufficiently the lines of further development
of the individual. The individual is not only an established and
unchangeable complex of psychological facts, but also an extremely
changeable entity. By exclusive reduction to causes, the primitive
trends of a personality are reinforced; this is only helpful when at
the same time these primitive tendencies are balanced by recognition
of their symbolic value. Analysis and reduction lead to causal truth;
this by itself does not help living, but brings about resignation and
hopelessness. On the other hand, the recognition of the intrinsic value
of a symbol leads to constructive truth and helps us to live. It induces
hopefulness and furthers the possibility of future development.

The functional importance of the symbol is clearly shown in the history
of civilisation. For thousands of years the religious symbol proved
a most efficacious means in the moral education of mankind. Only a
prejudiced mind could deny such an obvious fact. Concrete values cannot
take the place of the symbol; only new and more efficient symbols can
be substituted for those that are antiquated and outworn, such as have
lost their efficacy through the progress of intellectual analysis and
understanding. The further development of mankind can only be brought
about by means of symbols which represent something far in advance of
himself, and whose intellectual meanings cannot yet be grasped entirely.
The individual unconscious produces such symbols, and they are of the
greatest possible value in the moral development of the personality.

Man almost invariably has philosophic and religious views of the meaning
of the world and of his own life. There are some who are proud to have
none. These are exceptions outside the common path of mankind; they miss
an important function which has proved itself to be indispensable to the
human mind.

In such cases we find in the unconscious, instead of modern
symbolism, an antiquated archaic view of the world and of life. If a
requisite psychological function is not represented in the sphere of
consciousness, it exists in the unconscious in the form of an archaic or
embryonic prototype.

This brief _résumé_ may show what the reader cannot find in this
collection of papers. The essays are stations on the way of the more
general views developed above.

    C. G. JUNG.

    ZÜRICH,
    _January, 1916_.




CONTENTS


                                                                  PAGE

    EDITOR'S PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION                               v

    AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION                              ix

    AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION                             xiii


    CHAPTER I

    ON THE PSYCHOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY OF SO-CALLED OCCULT
    PHENOMENA                                                        1

     Difficulty of demarcation in borderline cases between
     epilepsy, hysteria, and mental deficiency--Somnambulism an
     hysterical manifestation--A case of spontaneous somnambulism,
     with some characters of protracted hysterical delirium--Other
     cases quoted--Charcot's classification of somnambulism--Naef's
     and Azam's cases of periodic amnesia--Proust's and Boileau's
     wandering-impulse cases--William James' case of Rev. Ansel
     Bourne--Other examples showing changes in consciousness--Hypnagogic
     hallucinations--Neurasthenic mental deficiency, Bleuler's
     case--Summing up of Miss Elsie K.'s case--Need of further
     scientific investigation in the field of psychological
     peculiarities.

    CASE OF SOMNAMBULISM IN A PERSON WITH NEUROPATHIC INHERITANCE
    (SPIRITUALISTIC MEDIUM)                                         16

     History of case--Accidental discovery of her mediumistic
     powers--Her somnambulic attacks, "_attitudes passionelles_,"
     catalepsy, tachypnoea, trance speeches, etc.--Ecstasies--Her
     conviction of the reality of her visions--Her dreams,
     hypnagogic and hypnopompic visions--The elevation of her
     somnambulic character--Mental thought transference--S. W.'s
     double life--Psychographic communications--Description of
     séances--The Prophetess of Prevorst--Automatic writing--The two
     grandfathers--Appearance of other somnambulic personalities.

    DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOMNAMBULIC PERSONALITIES                    30

     The psychograph and spiritualistic wonders--The
     grandfather the medium's "guide" or "control"--Ulrich von
     Gerbenstein--The somnambulic personalities have access
     to the medium's memory--Ivenes--S. W.'s amnesia for her
     ecstasies--Later séances--Her journeys on the other side--Oracular
     sayings--Conventi--Ivenes' dignity and superiority to her
     "guides"--Her previous incarnations--Her race-motherhood.

    MYSTIC SCIENCE AND MYSTIC SYSTEM OF POWERS                      40

     Her growing wilful deception--The waking
     state--Her peculiarities--Instability--Hysterical
     tendencies--Misreading--Errors of dispersion of attention discussed.

    SEMI-SOMNAMBULISM                                               48

    AUTOMATISMS                                                     49

     Table movements--Unconscious motor
     phenomena--Verbal suggestion and auto-suggestion--The
     experimenter's participation--The medium's unconscious
     response--Thought-reading--Table-tilting experiment,
     illustrated--Experiments with beginners--Myers' experiments
     in automatic writing--Janet's conversation with Lucie's
     subconsciousness--Example of the way the subconscious personality
     is constructed--Hallucinations appear with deepening hypnosis;
     some contributing factors--Comparison between dream symbols
     and appearance of somnambulic personalities--Extension of the
     unconscious sphere--The somnambulist's thinking is in plastic
     images, which are made objective in hallucinations--Why visual
     and not auditory hallucinations occur--Origin of hypnagogic
     hallucinations--Those of Jeanne d'Arc and others.

    THE CHANGE IN CHARACTER                                         64

     Noticeable in S. W.'s case, also in Mary
     Reynolds'--Association with amnesic disturbances--Influence
     of puberty in our case--S. W.'s systematic anæsthesia--Ivenes
     not so much a case of double consciousness as one in which she
     dreams herself into a higher ideal state--Similar pathological
     dreaming found in the lives of saints--Mechanism of hysterical
     identification--S. W.'s dreams break out explosively--Their origin
     and meaning, and their subjective roots.

    RELATION TO THE HYSTERICAL ATTACK                               75

     In considering the origin of attack, two moments, viz.
     irruption of hypnosis, and the psychic stimulation, must be
     taken into account--In susceptible subjects relatively small
     stimuli suffice to bring about somnambulism--Our case approaches
     to hysterical lethargy--The automatisms transform lethargy
     into hypnosis--Her ego-consciousness is identical in all
     states--Secondary somnambulic personalities split off from the
     primary unconscious personality--All group themselves under two
     types, the gay-hilarious, and serio-religious--The automatic
     speaking occurs--This facilitates the study of the subconscious
     personalities--Their share of the consciousness--The irruption of
     the hypnosis is complicated by an hysterical attack--The automatism
     arising in the motor area plays the part of hypnotist--When the
     hypnotism flows over into the visual sphere the hysterical attack
     occurs--Grandfathers I. and II.--Hysterical dissociations belong to
     the superficial layers of the ego-complex--There are layers beyond
     the reach of dissociation--Effect of the hysterical attack.

    RELATIONSHIP TO THE UNCONSCIOUS PERSONALITY                     82

     The serio-religious and the gay-hilarious explained by the
     anamnesis--Two halves of S. W.'s character--She is conscious of the
     painful contrast--She seeks a middle way--Her aspirations bring her
     to the puberty dream of the ideal Ivenes--The repressed ideas begin
     an autonomous existence--This corroborates Freud's disclosures
     concerning dreams--The relation of the somnambulic ego-complex and
     the waking consciousness.

    COURSE                                                          83

     The progress of this affection reached its maximum in
     4-8 weeks--Thenceforth a decline in the plasticity of the
     phenomena--All degrees of somnambulism were observable--Her
     manifest character improved--Similar improvements seen in certain
     cases of double consciousness--Conception that this phenomenon
     has a teleological meaning for the future personality--As seen in
     Jeanne d'Arc and Mary Reynolds II.

    THE UNCONSCIOUS ADDITIONAL CREATIVE WORK                        84

     S. W. shows primary susceptibility of the unconscious--Binet
     affirms the susceptibility of the hysteric is fifty times
     greater than that of normal--Cryptomnesia, a second additional
     creation--Cryptomnesic picture may enter consciousness
     intra-physically--Unconscious plagiarism explained--Zarathustra
     example--Glossolalia--Helen Smith's Martian language--The names
     in Ivenes' mystic system show rudimentary glossolalia--The
     Cryptomnesic picture may enter consciousness as a hallucination--Or
     arrive at consciousness by motor automatism--By automatisms regions
     formerly sealed are made accessible--Hypermnesia--Thought-reading
     a prototype for extraordinary intuitive knowledge of somnambulists
     and some normal persons--Association-concordance--Possibility
     that concept and feeling are not always clearly separated in the
     unconscious--S. W.'s mentality must be regarded as extraordinary.


    CHAPTER II

    THE ASSOCIATION METHOD                                          94

     LECTURE I.--Formula for test--Disturbances of reaction
     as complex-indicators--Discovery of a culprit by means of
     test--Disturbances of reaction show emotional rather than
     intellectual causes--Principal types--Value of the experiment in
     dealing with neurotics.

    LECTURE II.--FAMILIAR CONSTELLATIONS                           119

     Dr. Fürst's researches--Effect of environment and education
     on reactions--Effect of parental discord on children--Unconscious
     tendency to repetition of parental mistakes--Case of pathological
     association-concordance between mother and daughter--Neurosis, a
     counter-argument against the personality with which the patient is
     most nearly concerned--How to free the individual from unconscious
     attachments to the milieu.

    LECTURE III.--EXPERIENCES CONCERNING THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF
    THE CHILD                                                      132

     Importance of emotional processes in children--Little Anna's
     questions--Arrival of the baby brother--Anna's embarrassment and
     hostility--Introversion of the child--Of the adolescent--Her
     pathological interest in the Messina earthquake--The meaning of
     her fear--Anna's theories of birth--Meaning of her questions--Her
     father tells her something of origin of her little brother--Her
     fears now subside--The unconscious meaning of the child's wish to
     sit up late--Anna's equivalent to the "lumpf-theory" of little
     Hans--The stork-theory again--Author's remarks on the sexual
     enlightenment of the child.


    CHAPTER III

    THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE FATHER IN THE DESTINY OF THE
    INDIVIDUAL                                                     156

     Psychosexual relationship of child to father--Fürst's
     experiments quoted--The association experiment typical for
     man's psychological life--Adaptation to father--Father-complex
     productive of neurosis--Father-complex in man with masochistic and
     homosexual trends--Peasant woman "her father's favourite," tragic
     effect of the unconscious constellation--Case of eight-year-old
     boy with enuresis--Enuresis a sexual surrogate--Importance of
     infantile sexuality in life--Hence necessity for psychoanalytic
     investigation--The Jewish religion and the father-complex--Parental
     power guides the child like a higher controlling fate--The conflict
     for the development of the individual--Father-complex in Book of
     Tobias.


    CHAPTER IV

    A CONTRIBUTION TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF RUMOUR                     176

     Investigation of a rumour in a girls' school--The rumour arose
     from a dream--Teacher's suspicions--Was the rumour an invention
     and not, as alleged, the recital of a dream?--Interpolations
     in dreams--Collection of evidence--Duplication of persons an
     expression of their significance both in dreams and in dementia
     præcox--The additions and interpolations represent intensive
     unconscious participation--Hearsay evidence--Remarks.

    EPICRISIS                                                      188

     The dream is analysed by rumour--Psychoanalysis explains the
     construction of rumour--The dream gives the watchword for the
     unconscious--It brings to expression the ready-prepared sexual
     complexes--Marie X.'s unsatisfactory conduct brought her under
     reproof--Her indignation and repressed feelings lead to the
     dream--She uses this as an instrument of revenge against the
     teacher--More investigation needed in the field of rumour.


    CHAPTER V

    ON THE SIGNIFICANCE OF NUMBER-DREAMS                           191

     Symbolism of numbers has acquired fresh interest from
     Freud's investigations--Example of number dream of middle-aged
     man--How the number originates--A second dream also contains a
     number--Analysis--The wife's dream "Luke 137"--This dream is an
     example of cryptomnesia.


    CHAPTER VI

    A CRITICISM OF BLEULER'S "THEORY OF SCHIZOPHRENIC NEGATIVISM" 200

     Bleuler's concept of ambivalency and ambitendency--Every
     tendency balanced by its opposite--Schizophrenic
     negativism--Bleuler's summary of its causes--The painfulness of
     the complex necessitates a censorship of its expression--Thought
     disturbance the result of a complex--Thought pressure due to
     schizophrenic introversion--Resistance springs from peculiar sexual
     development--Schizophrenia shows a preponderance of introversion
     mechanisms--The value of the complex theory concept.


    CHAPTER VII

    PSYCHOANALYSIS                                                 206

     Doctors know too little of psychology, and psychologists
     of medicine--Strong prejudice aroused by Freud's conception of
     the importance of the sexual moment--The commoner prejudices
     discussed--Psychoanalysis not a method of suggestion or
     reasoning--The unconscious content is reached _via_ the
     conscious--Case of neurotic man with ergophobia for professional
     work--Case of neurotic woman who wants another child--Resistances
     against the analyst--Dream analysis the efficacious instrument
     of analysis--The scientist's fear of superstition--The genesis
     of dreams--Dream material is collected according to scientific
     method--The rite of baptism analysed--When the unconscious
     material fails, use the conscious--The physician's own complexes a
     hindrance--Interpretations of Viennese School too one-sided--Sexual
     phantasies both realistic and symbolic--The dream the subliminal
     picture of the individual's present psychology--Symbolism a process
     of comprehension by analogy--Analysis helps the neurotic to
     exchange his unconscious conflict for the real conflict of life.


    CHAPTER VIII

    ON PSYCHOANALYSIS                                              226

     Difficulties of public discussion--Competence to form an
     opinion presupposes a knowledge of the fundamental literature--The
     abandoned trauma theory--Fixation--The importance of the infantile
     past--Analysis discloses existence of innumerable unconscious
     phantasies--Œdipus complex--Fixation discussed--The critical
     moment for the outbreak of the neurosis--Predisposition--Author's
     energic view point--Application of the libido to the
     obstacle--Repression--Neurosis an act of adaptation that
     has failed--The energic view does not alter the technique of
     analysis--Analysis re-establishes the connection between the
     conscious and unconscious--Is a constructive task of great
     importance.


    CHAPTER IX

    ON SOME CRUCIAL POINTS IN PSYCHOANALYSIS                       236

    LETTER I.--LOY                                                 236

     The dream a means of re-establishing the moral equipoise--The
     dreamer finds therein the material for reconstruction--Methods
     discussed--The part played by "faith in the doctor"--Abreaction.

    LETTER II.--JUNG                                               238

     For the patient any method that works is good, though some
     more valuable than others--The doctor must choose what commends
     itself to his scientific conscience--Why the author gave up the
     use of hypnotism--Three cases quoted--Breuer and Freud's method
     a great advance in psychic treatment--Evolution of author's
     views--Importance of conception that behind the neurosis lies
     a moral conflict--Divergence from Freud's sexual theory of
     neurosis--The doctor's responsibility for the cleanliness of his
     own hands--Necessity that the psychoanalyst should be analysed--He
     is successful in so far as he has succeeded in his own moral
     development.

    LETTER III.--LOY                                               244

     Opportunism _v._ scientific honour--Psychoanalysis no more
     than hypnotism gets rid of "transference"--Cases of enuresis
     nocturna, and of washing-mania treated by hypnosis--On what grounds
     should such useful treatment be dispensed with?--The difficulty of
     finding a rational solution for the moral conflict--The doctor's
     dilemma of the two consciences.

    LETTER IV.--JUNG                                               248

     Author's standpoint that of the scientist, not
     practical physician--The analyst works in spite of the
     transference--Psychoanalysis not the only way--Sometimes less
     efficacious than any known method--Cases must be selected--For the
     author and his patients it is the best way--The real solution of
     the moral conflict comes from within, and then only because the
     patient has been brought to a new standpoint.

    LETTER. V.--LOY                                                252

     "What is truth?"--Parable of the prism--All man attains is
     relative truth--Fanaticism is the enemy to science--Psychoanalysis
     a method of dealing with basic motives of the human soul--Must not
     each case be treated individually?--Morals are above all relative.

    LETTER VI.--JUNG                                               256

     Definition of psychoanalysis--Technique--So-called chance is
     the law--Rules well-nigh impossible--The patients' unconscious is
     the analysts' best confederate--Questions of morality and education
     find solutions for themselves in later stages of analysis.

    LETTER VII.--LOY                                               258

     Contradictions in psychoanalytic literature--Should the doctor
     canalise the patient's libido?--Does he not indirectly suggest
     dreams to patient?

    LETTER VIII.--JUNG                                             261

     Different view-points in psychoanalysis--_Vide_ Freud's
     causality and Adler's finality--Discussion of meaning of
     transference--The meaning of "line of least resistance"--Man as a
     herd-animal--Rich endowment with social sense--Should take pleasure
     in life--Error as necessary to progress as truth--Patient must be
     trained in independence--Analyst is caught in his own net if he
     makes hard-and-fast rules--Through the analyst's suggestion only
     the outer form, never the content, is determined--The patient may
     mislead the doctor, but this is disadvantageous and delays him.

    LETTER IX.--LOY                                                267

     The line of least resistance is a compromise with all
     necessities--The analyst as accoucheur--The neurotic's faith in
     authority--Altruism innate in man--He advances in response to his
     own law.

    LETTER X.--JUNG                                                270

     Transference is the central problem of analysis--It may be
     positive or negative--Projection of infantile phantasies on the
     doctor--Biological "duties"--The psyche does not only react, but
     gives its individual reply--We have an actual sexual problem
     to-day--Evidences thereof--We have no real sexual morality, only
     a legal attitude--Our moral views are too undifferentiated--The
     neurotic is ill not because he has lost his faith in morality, but
     because he has not found the new authority in himself.


    CHAPTER X

    ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS IN PSYCHOPATHOLOGY        278

     Content of the unconscious--Defined as sum of all psychical
     processes below the threshold of consciousness--Answer to question
     how does the unconscious behave in neurosis found in its effect
     on normal consciousness--Example of a merchant--Compensating
     function of the unconscious--Symptomatic acts--Nebuchadnezzar's
     dream discussed--Intuitive ideas, and insane manifestations
     both emanate from the unconscious--Eccentricities pre-exist
     a breakdown--In mental disorder unconscious processes
     break-through into consciousness and disturb equilibrium--True
     also in fanaticism--Pathological compensation in case of
     paranoia--Unconscious processes have to struggle against
     resistances in the conscious mind--Distortion--In morbid conditions
     the function of the unconscious is one of compensation.


    CHAPTER XI

    A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES             287

     Striking contrast between hysteria and dementia
     præcox--Extroversion and Introversion--Repression--Hysterical
     transference and repression the mechanism of
     extroversion--Depreciation of the external world the mechanism
     of introversion--The nervous temperament pre-exists the
     illness--Examples of the two types from literature--James's Tough
     and Tender-minded--Warringer's Sympathy and Abstraction--Schiller's
     Naïf and Sentimental--Nietzsche's Apollien and Dionysian--Gross's
     Weakness and Reinforcement of Consecutive Function--Freud and
     Adler's Causalism and Finality--The fundamental need for further
     study of the two types.


    CHAPTER XII

    THE PSYCHOLOGY OF DREAMS                                       299

     Psychic structure of dream contrasted with that of conscious
     thought--Why a dream seems meaningless--Freud's empirical
     evidence--Technique, analysis of a dream--The causal and
     teleological view of the dream--A typical dream with mythological
     content--Compensating function of dreams--Phallic symbols.


    CHAPTER XIII

    THE CONTENT OF THE PSYCHOSES                                   312

     Discussion of psychological _v._ physical origin of
     mental disease--Mediæval conception of madness as work of evil
     spirits--Development of materialistic idea that diseases of
     the mind are diseases of the brain--Psychiatrists have come to
     regard function as accessory to the organ--Analysis of patients
     entering Burgholzi Asylum--A quarter only show lesions of the
     brain--The psychiatry of the future must advance by way of
     psychology--Cases of dementia præcox illustrating recent methods
     in psychiatry--The development of the outbreak at a moment of
     great emotion--Delusions determined by deficiencies in the
     patient's personality--Difficulties of investigation--Temporary
     remission of mental symptoms proves that reason survives in
     spite of preoccupation with diseased thoughts--Case of dementia
     præcox, showing exceeding richness of phantasy formations, and the
     continuity of ideas.


    PART II.                                                       336

     Freud's case of paranoid dementia--(Schreber case)--Two ways
     of regarding Goethe's "Faust"--Retrospective and prospective
     understanding--The scientific mind thinks causally--This is
     but one half of comprehension--Pathological and mythological
     formations, both structures of the imagination--Flournoy's
     case--Misunderstanding of author's analysis of it--Adaptations
     only possible to the introverted type by means of a
     world-philosophy--The extroverted type always arrives at a
     general theory subsequently--Psychasthenia is the neurosis of
     introversion, hysteria of extroversion--These diseases typify the
     general attitude of the types to the phenomena of the external
     world--The extreme difference in type a great obstacle to common
     understanding--The general result of the constructive method is a
     subjective view, not a scientific theory.


    CHAPTER XIV

    FOREWORD TO NEW EDITION                                        352

     Adler's views more fully discussed--The psychological events
     of the war force the problems of the unconscious on society--The
     psychology of individuals corresponds to the psychology of nations.

    THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS PROCESSES                    354

    I. THE BEGINNING OF PSYCHOANALYSIS

     The evolution of psychology--How little it has had to offer
     to the psychiatrist till Freud's discoveries--The origin and
     reception of psychoanalysis--The prejudiced attitude of certain
     physicians--Freud's view that his best work arouses greatest
     resistances--The Nancy School--Breuer's first case--"The talking
     cure"--The English "shock theory"--Followed by the trauma
     theory--Discussion of predisposition--Author's case of hysteria
     following fright from horses--The pathogenic importance of the
     hidden erotic conflict.

    II. THE SEXUAL THEORY                                         367

     Humanity evolves its own restrictions on sexuality for the
     sake of the advance of civilisation--The presence of a grave
     sexual problem testifies to the need of more differentiated
     conceptions--The erotic conflict largely unconscious--Neurosis
     represents the unsuccessful attempt of the individual to solve
     the problem in his own case--To understand the idea of the
     dream as a wish-fulfilment the manifest and latent content must
     be taken in review--The nature of unconscious wishes--Dream
     analysis leads to the deepest recesses of the unconscious--The
     analyst compared to the accoucheur--The highest development
     of the individual is sometimes in complete conflict with the
     herd-morality--Psychoanalysis provides the patient with a
     philosophy of life founded upon insight--Man has within himself
     the essence of morals--Both the moral and immoral man must accept
     the corrective of the unconscious--Our sexual morality too
     undifferentiated--Freud's sexual theory right to a point but too
     one-sided.

    III. THE OTHER VIEWPOINT: THE WILL TO POWER                    381

     The superman--Nietzsche's failure to justify his theories by
     his life--His view also too one-sided--Adler's theory of neurosis
     founded upon the principle of power--Case of hysteria discussed
     from the standpoint of unconscious motivation.

    IV. THE TWO TYPES OF PSYCHOLOGY                                391

     Thinking the natural adaptive function for introvert,
     feeling for the extrovert--The sexual theory promulgated from
     the standpoint of feeling, the power theory from that of
     thought--Criticism of both theories indispensable--Symptoms of
     neurosis are aims at a new synthesis of life--Definition of
     positive value as energy in a useful form--In neurosis energy
     is located in an inferior form--Sublimation a transference of
     sexual energy to another sphere--Destiny often frustrates purely
     rational sublimations--Rationalism, the world-war an example of
     its breakdown--So-called "disposable energy"--Case of American
     business-man--The types have different problems--The feelings of
     the introvert relatively conventional and undifferentiated--The
     thinking of the extrovert colourless and dry--The types apt to
     marry, but not to understand one another--The theories of the
     types led to a new theory of psychogenic disturbances--Neurosis
     postulates the existence of an unconscious conflict--New theory
     declares it to lie between the natural conscious function and the
     repressed undifferentiated co-function--Repressed feelings of
     introvert projected as vague physical symptoms--Repressed thought
     of extrovert projected as hysterical symptoms--In analysis the
     libido liberated from the unconscious phantasies is projected on
     to the physician--It finds its way into the transference, which in
     turn is dissolved--The new channel for the libido is already found.

    V. THE PERSONAL AND THE IMPERSONAL UNCONSCIOUS                 408

     Transference a projection of unconscious contents on to
     the physician--Contents of the unconscious at first personal,
     later impersonal--Primordial images--A differentiation of the
     unconscious contents necessary--The deepest layers are now
     designated impersonal, absolute, collective, or super-personal--The
     libido now liberated in analysis sinks down into the unconscious,
     reviving original "thought-feelings"--Example in Mayer's idea of
     conservation of energy--The world-wide existence of the primordial
     images--The concept of God--Enantiodromia, the world-war an example
     of this--In analysis the pairs of opposites are torn asunder--This
     necessitates that patients learn to differentiate between the ego
     and non-ego.

    VI. THE SYNTHETIC OR CONSTRUCTIVE METHOD                       417

     The transcendental function, a new way of regarding the
     psychological materials as a bridge between the two sides of the
     psyche--Example of method of synthesis of symbols of absolute
     unconscious--Dream of the crab.

    VII. ANALYTICAL (CAUSAL-REDUCTIVE) INTERPRETATION              419

     The unconscious homosexual tendencies--The causal-reductive
     method does not strictly follow the patient's own
     associations--It does not interpret the dream as subjective
     phenomenon--Interpretation on both objective and subjective planes
     necessary.

    VIII. THE SYNTHETIC (CONSTRUCTIVE) INTERPRETATION              422

     Homosexuality in this case an unconscious defence against
     acceptance of "more dangerous" tendencies--Fascination an
     unconscious compulsion--"Identifications" have power so long as
     they remain unconscious--Union of subjective and objective view of
     dream gives its full meaning.

    IX. THE DOMINANTS OF THE SUPER-PERSONAL UNCONSCIOUS            426

     Projection in relation to transference--Projection of certain
     attributes not explicable on the ground of personal contents, but
     must be referred to the super-personal--Collective unconscious
     is sediment of all the experience of the universe throughout
     time--Certain features that have become prominent, _e.g._ gods
     and demons, are called "dominants" and have a character of
     universal psychological truth--These dominants become conscious
     as projections, explaining infatuations, incompatibilities,
     unconscious conflicts, etc.--The "magical demon" is the most
     primitive concept of God--Analysis traces home these projections
     to the non-ego--Fear belongs to the dominants of the collective
     unconscious--The next step is the detachment of these projections
     from the objects of consciousness--This liberates energy for
     further progress--The transcendental function--The hero-myth
     symbolises this differentiation of ego from non-ego.

    X. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE TYPES OF INTROVERSION AND EXTROVERSION 437

     The types apprehend life by opposite methods--All psychic
     images have two sides, one directed towards the object, the
     other towards the soul (idea)--The feelings of the introvert
     are under repression, the thoughts of the extrovert--Analytical
     development of the unconscious brings out the secondary function
     in each type--The pairs of opposites being thus demonstrated need
     for synthesis arises--This is a compensatory process leading to
     enrichment of the individual.

    XI. GENERAL REMARKS ON THE THERAPY                             441

     The unconscious is a source of danger when the individual
     is not at one with it--It also creates harmonious prospective
     combinations which can be an effective source of wisdom for the
     individual--The use of the phantasies in conjunction with conscious
     elaboration is the transcendental function--Not every individual
     passes through all the stages described--For some the end of
     analysis is reached when the cure is achieved--Others are under a
     moral necessity to reach a full psychological development.

    CONCLUSION                                                     443


    CHAPTER XV

    THE CONCEPT OF THE UNCONSCIOUS                                 445

    I. THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE PERSONAL AND IMPERSONAL
    UNCONSCIOUS.

     Development of concepts--Removal of repression does not
     empty the unconscious--Repression is a special phenomenon--The
     unconscious contains not only repressed material, but subliminal
     sense-impressions which have never reached consciousness--It is
     constantly busied with new phantasy formation--Patients are urged
     to retain their hold on repressed materials that analysis has
     brought into consciousness--Prolonged analysis reveals contents
     other than those of a personal nature--Necessity to differentiate a
     layer called the "personal" unconscious whose materials originate
     in the personal past--Their omission from consciousness constitutes
     a defect or neglect--The moral reaction against this neglect shows
     they could become conscious if sufficient trouble were taken--The
     gradual transference of the personal unconscious contents into
     consciousness extends the periphery of consciousness.

    II. THE CONSEQUENCES OF ASSIMILATION OF THE UNCONSCIOUS        449

     First result is increased self-consciousness--May lead to
     a sense of God-Almightiness in one type, or to overwhelming
     self-depreciation in the other--A result of ascribing to
     oneself qualities or vices that do not belong individually but
     collectively--The collective pysche divided into collective
     mind and collective soul--The collective contains the "parties
     inférieures" of Janet; the conscious and personal unconscious
     contains the "parties supérieures"--Incorporation of the impersonal
     unconscious leads to a dissolution of the pairs of opposites--As
     seen in neurotic, who combines megalomania and sense of inferiority
     in extreme degree--Primitive man possesses the collective vices and
     virtues in an undifferentiated way--Mental conflict only begins
     with conscious personal development--Desire to be good brings about
     repression of the bad--Collective view-point, though necessary,
     is dangerous to individuality--Collective psyche is the result of
     psychological differentiation of the gregarious instincts--Dangers
     of identification with collective psyche--Recognition of the
     different psychology of the types a safeguard, promoting a proper
     respect for individuality of the opposite type--Individuation
     hampered by man's suggestibility and tendency to imitation.

    III. THE INDIVIDUAL AS AN EXCERPT OF THE COLLECTIVE PSYCHE     456

     The personal unconscious contains repressed materials capable
     of becoming conscious--By also incorporating the impersonal
     contents the state of God-Almightiness is brought about--The
     "persona" a mask for the collective psyche--Development of
     God-Almightiness, physical concomitants--Dissolution of the
     persona results in release of phantasy--Analogy with mental
     derangement--Difference consists in that the unconscious is at
     first deliberately brought into consciousness by consent, and later
     that it is recognised as having psychic validity only.

    IV. ENDEAVOURS TO FREE THE INDIVIDUALITY FROM THE COLLECTIVE
    PSYCHE                                                         459

     (i) _The Regressive Restoration of the Persona_--Three ways
     open, (_a_) Regressive application of a reductive theory; (_b_)
     application of God-Almightiness as a "virile protest;" (_c_)
     recognition of the primitive archaic collective psychology in
     man--Temptation to solve the difficulty by forgetting one has an
     unconscious--This does not work--The unconscious cannot be deprived
     of libido, nor its activity stilled for any length of time.

     (ii) _Identification with the Collective
     Psyche_--God-Almightiness developed into a system--Identification
     increases feeling for life or sense of power, according to the
     type--This, mystically understood, is the "yearning for the
     mother" of the hero-myth, or the "incest-wish" of Freud--It is the
     collective psyche that has to be overcome--Identification with the
     collective psyche is a failure because being lost in it, a bearable
     or satisfactory life is impossible.

    V. LEADING PRINCIPLES FOR THE TREATMENT OF COLLECTIVE PSYCHE   468

     Neither regressive restoration of the persona,
     nor identification with collective psyche solves the
     problem--Psychology will have to admit a plurality of
     principles--Only the collective part of individual psychology
     can be the subject of scientific study--What belongs to the
     psychology of the individual requires its own text-book--The
     persona must be strictly separated from the concept of the
     individual--What is individual is the remnant which can
     never be merged into the collective--Analysis of the persona
     transfers greater value on to the individuality, increasing its
     conflict with collectivity--The persona is identical with a
     one-sided attitude, being a typical attitude in which thought
     or feeling or intuition dominates, causing relative repression
     of the other functions--Dissolution of persona indispensable
     to individuation--The more individual a person is the more he
     assimilates and develops those attributes that are the basis of a
     collective concept of human nature--Unifying function between the
     conscious and unconscious, between the collective and individual is
     found in the phantasies--Phantasy the creative soil for everything
     that has brought development to humanity--Phantasy not to be
     taken literally but hermeneutically--Hermeneutics adds analogies
     to those already given--Hermeneutical interpretation indicates
     the means of synthesis of the individual, provided as soon as the
     symbolic outlines of the path are understood they are followed
     up--Co-operation and honest endeavour essential to cure--The moral
     factor determines the cure--"Life-lines" have a short and ephemeral
     value--Dreams are compensatory to conscious thinking--Watch must be
     kept for dreams indicative of causes of error--Hence the patient
     must remain in contact with the unconscious--End of analysis
     reached when enough psychological insight and mastery of technique
     is acquired to enable individual to follow his ever-changing
     life-line, and to retain hold on the libido currents which give
     conscious support to his individuality.


    SUMMARY                                                        472


    INDEX                                                          475




ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY




CHAPTER I

ON THE PSYCHOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY OF SO-CALLED OCCULT PHENOMENA[1]


In that wide field of psychopathic deficiency where Science has
demarcated the diseases of epilepsy, hysteria and neurasthenia, we meet
scattered observations concerning certain rare states of consciousness
as to whose meaning authors are not yet agreed. These observations
spring up sporadically in the literature on narcolepsy, lethargy,
_automatisme ambulatoire_, periodic amnesia, double consciousness,
somnambulism, pathological dreamy states, pathological lying, etc.

These states are sometimes attributed to epilepsy, sometimes
to hysteria, sometimes to exhaustion of the nervous system, or
neurasthenia, sometimes they are allowed all the dignity of a disease
_sui generis_. Patients occasionally work through a whole graduated
scale of diagnoses, from epilepsy, through hysteria, up to simulation.
In practice, on the one hand, these conditions can only be separated
with great difficulty from the so-called neuroses, sometimes even are
indistinguishable from them; on the other, certain features in the
region of pathological deficiency present more than a mere analogical
relationship not only with phenomena of normal psychology, but also
with the psychology of the supernormal, of genius. Various as are the
individual phenomena in this region, there is certainly no case that
cannot be connected by some intermediate example with the other typical
cases. This relationship in the pictures presented by hysteria and
epilepsy is very close. Recently the view has even been maintained that
there is no clean-cut frontier between epilepsy and hysteria, and that
a difference is only to be noted in extreme cases. Steffens says, for
example[2]--"We are forced to the conclusion that in essence hysteria
and epilepsy are not fundamentally different, that the cause of the
disease is the same, but is manifest in a diverse form, in different
intensity and permanence."

The demarcation of hysteria and certain borderline cases of epilepsy
from congenital and acquired psychopathic mental deficiency likewise
presents the greatest difficulties. The symptoms of one or other disease
everywhere invade the neighbouring realm, so violence is done to the
facts when they are split off and considered as belonging to one or
other realm. The demarcation of psychopathic mental deficiency from the
normal is an absolutely impossible task, the difference is everywhere
only "more or less." The classification in the region of mental
deficiency itself is confronted by the same difficulty. At best, certain
classes can be separated off which crystallise round some well-marked
nucleus through having peculiarly typical features. Turning away from
the two large groups of intellectual and emotional deficiency, there
remain those deficiencies coloured pre-eminently by hysteria or epilepsy
(epileptoid) or neurasthenia, which are not notably deficiency of the
intellect or of feeling. It is essentially in this region, insusceptible
of any absolute classification, that the above-named conditions play
their part. As is well known, they can appear as part manifestations
of a typical epilepsy or hysteria, or can exist separately in the
realm of psychopathic mental deficiency, where their qualifications of
epileptic or hysterical are often due to the non-essential accessory
features. It is thus the rule to place somnambulism among hysterical
diseases, because it is occasionally a phenomenon of severe hysteria,
or because mild so-called hysterical symptoms may accompany it. Binet
says: "Il n'y a pas une somnambulisme, état nerveux toujours identique
à lui-même, il y a des somnambulismes." As one of the manifestations
of a severe hysteria, somnambulism is not an unknown phenomenon, but
as a pathological entity, as a disease _sui generis_, it must be
somewhat rare, to judge by its infrequency in German literature on the
subject. So-called spontaneous somnambulism, resting upon a foundation
of hysterically-tinged psychopathic deficiency, is not a very common
occurrence and it is worth while to devote closer study to these cases,
for they occasionally present a mass of interesting particulars.

_Case of Miss Elise K._, aged 40, single; book-keeper in a large
business; no hereditary taint, except that it is alleged a brother
became slightly nervous after family misfortune and illness. Well
educated, of a cheerful, joyous nature, not of a saving disposition,
always occupied with some big idea. She was very kind-hearted and
gentle, did a great deal both for her parents, who were living in very
modest circumstances, and for strangers. Nevertheless she was not happy,
because she thought she did not understand herself. She had always
enjoyed good health till a few years ago, when she is said to have
been treated for dilatation of the stomach and tapeworm. During this
illness her hair became rapidly white, later she had typhoid fever. An
engagement was terminated by the death of her fiancé from paralysis. She
had been very nervous for a year and a half. In the summer of 1897 she
went away for change of air and treatment by hydropathy. She herself
says that for about a year she has had moments during work when her
thoughts seem to stand still, but she does not fall asleep. Nevertheless
she makes no mistakes in the accounts at such times. She has often been
to the wrong street and then suddenly noticed that she was not in the
right place. She has had no giddiness or attacks of fainting. Formerly
menstruation occurred regularly every four weeks, and without any
pain, but since she has been nervous and overworked it has come every
fourteen days. For a long time she has suffered from constant headache.
As accountant and book-keeper in a large establishment, the patient has
had very strenuous work, which she performs well and conscientiously. In
addition to the strenuous character of her work, in the last year she
had various new worries. Her brother was suddenly divorced. In addition
to her own work, she looked after his housekeeping, nursed him and his
child in a serious illness, and so on. To recuperate, she took a journey
on the 13th September to see a woman friend in South Germany. The great
joy at seeing her friend from whom she had been long separated, and
her participation in some festivities, deprived her of her rest. On
the 15th, she and her friend drank half a bottle of claret. This was
contrary to her usual habit. They then went for a walk in a cemetery,
where she began to tear up flowers and to scratch at the graves. She
remembered absolutely nothing of this afterwards. On the 16th she
remained with her friend without anything of importance happening. On
the 17th her friend brought her to Zürich. An acquaintance came with her
to the Asylum; on the way she spoke quite sensibly, but was very tired.
Outside the Asylum they met three boys, whom she described as the "three
dead people she had dug up." She then wanted to go to the neighbouring
cemetery, but was persuaded to come to the Asylum.

She is small, delicately formed, slightly anæmic. The heart is slightly
enlarged to the left, there are no murmurs, but some reduplication of
the sounds, the mitral being markedly accentuated. The liver dulness
reaches to the border of the ribs. Patella-reflex is somewhat increased,
but otherwise no tendon-reflexes. There is neither anæsthesia,
analgesia, nor paralysis. Rough examination of the field of vision with
the hands shows no contraction. The patient's hair is a very light
yellow-white colour; on the whole she looks her age. She gives her
history and tells recent events quite clearly, but has no recollection
of what took place in the cemetery at C. or outside the Asylum. During
the night of the 17th-18th she spoke to the attendant and declared she
saw the whole room full of dead people--looking like skeletons. She was
not at all frightened, but was rather surprised that the attendant did
not see them too. Once she ran to the window, but was otherwise quiet.
The next morning, while still in bed, she saw skeletons, but not in
the afternoon. The following night at four o'clock she awoke and heard
the dead children in the neighbouring cemetery cry out that they had
been buried alive. She wanted to go out to dig them up, but allowed
herself to be restrained. Next morning at seven o'clock she was still
delirious, but recalled accurately the events in the cemetery at C. and
those on approaching the Asylum. She stated that at C. she wanted to
dig up the dead children who were calling her. She had only torn up the
flowers to free the graves and to be able to get at them. In this state
Professor Bleuler explained to her that later on, when in a normal state
again, she would remember everything. The patient slept in the morning,
afterwards was quite clear, and felt herself relatively well. She did
indeed remember the attacks, but maintained a remarkable indifference
towards them. The following nights, with the exception of those of the
22nd and the 25th September, she again had slight attacks of delirium,
when once more she had to deal with the dead. The details of the attacks
differed, however. Twice she saw the dead in her bed, but she did not
appear to be afraid of them, she got out of bed frequently, however,
because she did not want "to inconvenience the dead"; several times she
wanted to leave the room.

After a few nights free from attacks there was a slight one on the
30th Sept., when she called the dead from the window. During the day
her mind was clear. On the 3rd of October she saw a whole crowd of
skeletons in the drawingroom, as she afterwards related, during full
consciousness. Although she doubted the reality of the skeletons, she
could not convince herself that it was a hallucination. The following
night, between twelve and one o'clock--the earlier attacks were usually
about this time--she was obsessed with the idea of dead people for
about ten minutes. She sat up in bed, stared at a corner and said:
"Well, come!--but they're not all there. Come along! Why don't you
come? The room is big enough, there's room for all; when all are there,
I'll come too." Then she lay down with the words: "Now they're all
there," and fell asleep again. In the morning she had not the slightest
recollection of any of these attacks. Very short attacks occurred in
the nights of the 4th, 6th, 9th, 13th and 15th of October, between
twelve and one o'clock. The last three occurred during the menstrual
period. The attendant spoke to her several times, showed her the lighted
street-lamps, and trees; but she did not react to this conversation.
Since then the attacks have altogether ceased. The patient has
complained about a number of troubles which she had had all along. She
suffered much from headache the morning after the attacks. She said it
was unbearable. Five grains of Sacch. lactis promptly alleviated this;
then she complained of pains in both fore-arms, which she described as
if it were a teno-synovitis. She regarded the bulging of the muscles in
flexion as a swelling, and asked to be massaged. Nothing could be seen
objectively, and no attention being paid to it, the trouble disappeared.
She complained exceedingly and for a long time about the thickening of
a toenail, even after the thickened part had been removed. Sleep was
often disturbed. She would not give her consent to be hypnotised for
the night-attacks. Finally on account of headache and disturbed sleep
she agreed to hypnotic treatment. She proved a good subject, and at the
first sitting fell into deep sleep with analgesia and amnesia.

In November she was again asked whether she could now remember the
attack on the 19th September which it had been suggested that she would
recall. It gave her great trouble to recollect it, and in the end she
could only state the chief facts, she had forgotten the details.

It should be added that the patient was not superstitious, and in
her healthy days had never particularly interested herself in the
supernatural. During the whole course of treatment, which ended on the
14th November, great indifference was evinced both to the illness and
the cure. Next spring the patient returned for out-patient treatment
of the headache, which had come back during the very hard work of
these months. Apart from this symptom her condition left nothing to
be desired. It was demonstrated that she had no remembrance of the
attacks of the previous autumn, not even of those of the 19th September
and earlier. On the other hand, in hypnosis she could recount the
proceedings in the cemetery and during the nightly disturbances.

By the peculiar hallucination and by its appearance our case recalls
the conditions which V. Kraft-Ebing has described as "protracted states
of hysterical delirium." He says: "Such conditions of delirium occur
in the slighter cases of hysteria. Protracted hysterical delirium is
built upon a foundation of temporary exhaustion. Excitement seems to
determine an outbreak, and it readily recurs. Most frequently there
is persecution-delirium with very violent anxiety, sometimes of a
religious or erotic character. Hallucinations of all the senses are
not rare, but illusions of sight, smell and feeling are the commonest,
and most important. The visual hallucinations are especially visions
of animals, pictures of corpses, phantastic processions in which dead
persons, devils and ghosts swarm. The illusions of hearing are simply
sounds (shrieks, howlings, claps of thunder) or local hallucinations,
frequently with a sexual content."

This patient's visions of corpses, occurring almost always in attacks,
recall the states occasionally seen in hystero-epilepsy. There likewise
occur specific visions which, in contrast with protracted delirium, are
connected with single attacks.

(1) A lady 30 years of age with _grande hystérie_ had twilight states in
which as a rule she was troubled by terrible hallucinations; she saw her
children carried away from her, wild beasts eating them up, and so on.
She has amnesia for the content of the individual attacks.[3]

(2) A girl of 17, likewise a semi-hysteric, saw in her attacks the
corpse of her dead mother approaching her to draw her to her. Patient
has amnesia for the attacks.[4]

These are cases of severe hysteria wherein consciousness rests upon a
profound stage of dreaming. The nature of the attack and the stability
of the hallucination alone show a certain kinship with our case, which
in this respect has numerous analogies with the corresponding states of
hysteria. For instance, with those cases where a psychical shock (rape,
etc.) was the occasion for the outbreak of hysterical attacks, and where
at times the original incident is lived over again, stereotyped in the
hallucination. But our case gets its specific mould from the identity of
the consciousness in the different attacks. It is an "Etat Second" with
its own memory and separated from the waking state by complete amnesia.
This differentiates it from the above-mentioned twilight states and
links it to the so-called somnambulic conditions.

Charcot[5] divides the somnambulic states into two chief classes:--

1. Delirium with well-marked incoordination of representation and action.

2. Delirium with co-ordinated action. This approaches the waking state.

Our case belongs to the latter class.

If by somnambulism be understood a state of systematised partial
waking,[6] any critical review of this affection must take account of
those exceptional cases of recurrent amnesias which have been observed
now and again. These, apart from nocturnal ambulism, are the simplest
conditions of systematised partial waking. Naef's case is certainly the
most remarkable in the literature. It deals with a gentleman of 32, with
a very bad family history presenting numerous signs of degeneration,
partly functional, partly organic. In consequence of over-work at the
age of 17 he had a peculiar twilight state with delusions, which lasted
some days and was cured with a sudden recovery of memory. Later he
was subject to frequent attacks of giddiness and palpitation of the
heart and vomiting; but these attacks were never attended by loss of
consciousness. At the termination of some feverish illness he suddenly
travelled from Australia to Zürich, where he lived for some weeks in
careless cheerfulness, and only came to himself when he read in the
paper of his sudden disappearance from Australia. He had a total and
retrograde amnesia for the several months which included the journey to
Australia, his sojourn there and the return journey.

Azam[7] has published a case of periodic amnesia. Albert X., 12 1/2
years old, of hysterical disposition, was several times attacked in
the course of a few years by conditions of amnesia in which he forgot
reading, writing and arithmetic, even at times his own language, for
several weeks at a stretch. The intervals were normal.

Proust[8] has published a case of _Automatisme ambulatoire_ with
pronounced hysteria which differs from Naef's in the repeated occurrence
of the attacks. An educated man, 30 years old, exhibits all the signs
of _grande hystérie;_ he is very suggestible, has from time to time,
under the influence of excitement, attacks of amnesia which last from
two days to several weeks. During these states he wanders about, visits
relatives, destroys various objects, incurs debts, and has even been
convicted of "picking pockets."

Boileau describes a similar case[9] of wandering-impulse. A widow of
22, highly hysterical, became terrified at the prospect of a necessary
operation for salpingitis; she left the hospital and fell into a state
of somnambulism, from which she awoke three days later with total
amnesia. During these three days she had travelled a distance of about
60 kilometres to fetch her child.

William James has described a case of an "ambulatory sort."[10]

The Rev. Ansel Bourne, an itinerant preacher, 30 years of age,
psychopathic, had on a few occasions attacks of loss of consciousness
lasting one hour. One day (January 17, 1887) he suddenly disappeared
from Greene, after having taken 551 dollars out of the bank. He
remained hidden for two months. During this time he had taken a little
shop under the name of H. J. Browne in Norriston, Pa., and had carefully
attended to all purchases, although he had never done this sort of work
before. On March 14, 1887, he suddenly awoke and went back home, and had
complete amnesia for the interval.

Mesnet[11] publishes the following case:--

F., 27 years old, sergeant in the African regiment, was wounded in
the parietal bone at Bazeilles. Suffered for a year from hemiplegia,
which disappeared when the wound healed. During the course of his
illness the patient had attacks of somnambulism, with marked limitation
of consciousness; all the senses were paralysed, with the exception
of taste and a small portion of the visual sense. The movements
were co-ordinated, but obstacles in the way of their performance
were overcome with difficulty. During the attacks he had an absurd
collecting-mania. By various manipulations one could demonstrate a
hallucinatory content in his consciousness; for instance, when a stick
was put in his hand he would feel himself transported to a battle scene,
would place himself on guard, see the enemy approaching, etc.

Guinon and Sophie Waltke[12] made the following experiments on
hysterics:--

A blue glass was held in front of the eyes of a female patient during
a hysterical attack; she regularly saw the picture of her mother in
the blue sky. A red glass showed her a bleeding wound, a yellow one an
orange-seller or a lady with a yellow dress.

Mesnet's case reminds one of the cases of occasional attacks of
shrinkage of memory.

MacNish[13] communicates a similar case.

An apparently healthy young lady suddenly fell into an abnormally long
and deep sleep--it is said without prodromal symptoms. On awaking she
had forgotten the words for and the knowledge of the simplest things.
She had again to learn to read, write, and count; her progress was rapid
in this re-learning. After a second attack she again woke in her normal
state, but without recollection of the period when she had forgotten
things. These states alternated for more than four years, during which
consciousness showed continuity within the two states, but was separated
by an amnesia from the consciousness of the normal state.

These selected cases of various forms of changes of consciousness
all throw a certain light upon our case. Naef's case presents two
hysteriform eclipses of memory, one of which is marked by the appearance
of delusions, and the other by its long duration, contraction of the
field of consciousness, and desire to wander. The peculiar associated
impulses are specially clear in the cases of Proust and Mesnet. In our
case the impulsive tearing up of the flowers, the digging up of the
graves, form a parallel. The continuity of consciousness which the
patient presents in the individual attacks recalls the behaviour of
the consciousness in MacNish's case; hence our case may be regarded
as a transient phenomenon of alternating consciousness. The dreamlike
hallucinatory content of the limited consciousness in our case does not,
however, justify an unqualified assignment to this group of _double
consciousness_. The hallucinations in the second state show a certain
creativeness which seems to be conditioned by the auto-suggestibility
of this state. In Mesnet's case we noticed the appearance of
hallucinatory processes from simple stimulation of touch. The patient's
subconsciousness employs simple perceptions for the automatic
construction of complicated scenes which then take possession of the
limited consciousness. A somewhat similar view must be taken about
our patient's hallucinations; at least, the external conditions which
gave rise to the appearance of the hallucinations seem to strengthen
our supposition. The walk in the cemetery induces the vision of the
skeletons; the meeting with the three boys arouses the hallucination of
children buried alive whose voices the patient hears at night-time. She
arrived at the cemetery in a somnambulic state, which on this occasion
was specially intense in consequence of her having taken alcohol. She
performed actions almost instinctively about which her subconsciousness
nevertheless did receive certain impressions. (The part played here by
alcohol must not be underestimated. We know from experience that it does
not only act adversely upon these conditions, but, like every other
narcotic, it gives rise to a certain increase of suggestibility.) The
impressions received in somnambulism subconsciously form independent
growths, and finally reach perception as hallucinations. Thus our
case closely corresponds to those somnambulic dream-states which have
recently been subjected to a penetrating study in England and France.

These lapses of memory, which at first seem without content, gain a
content by means of accidental auto-suggestion, and this content builds
itself up automatically to a certain extent. It achieves no further
development, probably on account of the improvement now beginning,
and finally it disappears altogether as recovery sets in. Binet and
Féré have made numerous experiments on the implanting of suggestions
in states of partial sleep. They have shown, for example, that when a
pencil is put in the anæsthetic hand of a hysteric, letters of great
length are written automatically whose contents are unknown to the
patient's consciousness. Cutaneous stimuli in anæsthetic regions are
sometimes perceived as visual images, or at least as vivid associated
visual presentations. These independent transmutations of simple stimuli
must be regarded as primary phenomena in the formation of somnambulic
dream-pictures. Analogous manifestations occur in exceptional cases
within the sphere of waking consciousness. Goethe,[14] for instance,
states that when he sat down, lowered his head and vividly conjured up
the image of a flower, he saw it undergoing changes of its own accord,
as if entering into new combinations.

In half-waking states these manifestations are relatively frequent
in the so-called hypnagogic hallucinations. The automatisms which
the Goethe example illustrates are differentiated from the truly
somnambulic, inasmuch as the primary presentation is a conscious one
in this case; the further development of the automatism is maintained
within the definite limits of the original presentation, that is, within
the purely motor or visual region.

If the primary presentation disappears, or if it is never conscious at
all, and if the automatic development overlaps neighbouring regions,
we lose every possibility of a demarcation between waking automatisms
and those of the somnambulic state; this will occur, for instance,
if the presentation of a hand plucking the flower gets joined to the
perception of the flower or the presentation of the smell of the flower.
We can then only differentiate it by the more or less. In one case
we then speak of the "waking hallucinations of the normal," in the
other, of the dream-vision of the somnambulists. The interpretation
of our patient's attacks as hysterical becomes more certain by the
demonstration of a probably psychogenic origin of the hallucination.
This is confirmed by her troubles, headache and teno-synovitis, which
have shown themselves amenable to suggestive treatment. The ætiological
factor alone is not sufficient for the diagnosis of hysteria; it might
really be expected _a priori_ that in the course of a disease which is
so suitably treated by rest, as in the treatment of an exhaustion-state,
features would be observed here and there which could be interpreted
as manifestations of exhaustion. The question arises whether the
early lapses and later somnambulic attacks could not be conceived as
states of exhaustion, so-called "neurasthenic crises." We know that in
the realm of psychopathic mental deficiency there can arise the most
diverse epileptoid accidents, whose classification under epilepsy or
hysteria is at least doubtful. To quote C. Westphal: "On the basis of
numerous observations, I maintain that the so-called epileptoid attacks
form one of the most universal and commonest symptoms in the group of
diseases which we reckon among the mental diseases and neuropathies; the
mere appearance of one or more epileptic or epileptoid attacks is not
decisive for its course and prognosis. As mentioned, I have used the
concept of epileptoid in the widest sense for the attack itself."[15]

The epileptoid moments of our case are not far to seek; the objection
can, however, be raised that the colouring of the whole picture is
hysterical in the extreme. Against this, however, it must be stated
that every somnambulism is not _eo ipso_ hysterical. Occasionally
states occur in typical epilepsy which to experts seem parallel with
somnambulic states,[16] or which can only be distinguished by the
existence of genuine convulsions.[17]

As Diehl shows,[18] in neurasthenic mental deficiency crises also occur
which often confuse the diagnosis. A definite presentation-content
can even create a stereotyped repetition in the individual crisis.
Lately Mörchen has published a case of epileptoid neurasthenic twilight
state.[19]

I am indebted to Professor Bleuler for the report of the following
case:--

An educated gentleman of middle age--without epileptic antecedents--had
exhausted himself by many years of over-strenuous mental work. Without
other prodromal symptoms (such as depression, etc.) he attempted suicide
during a holiday; in a peculiar twilight state he suddenly threw himself
into the water from a bank, in sight of many persons. He was at once
pulled out and retained but a fleeting remembrance of the occurrence.

Bearing these observations in mind, neurasthenia must be allowed to
account for a considerable share in the attacks of our patient, Miss
E. K. The headaches and the teno-synovitis point to the existence of
a relatively mild hysteria, generally latent, but becoming manifest
under the influence of exhaustion. The genesis of this peculiar illness
explains the relationship which has been described between epilepsy,
hysteria and neurasthenia.

_Summary._--Miss Elise K. is a psychopathic defective with a tendency
to hysteria. Under the influence of nervous exhaustion she suffers from
attacks of epileptoid giddiness whose interpretation is uncertain at
first sight. Under the influence of an unusually large dose of alcohol
the attacks develop into definite somnambulism with hallucinations,
which are limited in the same way as dreams to accidental external
perceptions. When the nervous exhaustion is cured the hysterical
manifestations disappear.

In the region of psychopathic deficiency with hysterical colouring, we
encounter numerous phenomena which show, as in this case, symptoms of
diverse defined diseases, which cannot be attributed with certainty
to any one of them. These phenomena are partially recognised to be
independent; for instance, pathological lying, pathological reveries,
etc. Many of these states, however, still await thorough scientific
investigation; at present they belong more or less to the domain of
scientific gossip. Persons with habitual hallucinations, and also the
inspired, exhibit these states; they draw the attention of the crowd to
themselves, now as poet or artist, now as saviour, prophet or founder of
a new sect.

The genesis of the peculiar frame of mind of these persons is for the
most part lost in obscurity, for it is only very rarely that one of
these remarkable personalities can be subjected to exact observation.
In view of the often great historical importance of these persons, it
is much to be wished that we had some scientific material which would
enable us to gain a closer insight into the psychological development of
their peculiarities. Apart from the now practically useless productions
of the pneumatological school at the beginning of the nineteenth
century, German scientific literature is very poor in this respect;
indeed, there seems to be real aversion from investigation in this
field. For the facts so far gathered we are indebted almost exclusively
to the labours of French and English workers. It seems at least
desirable that our literature should be enlarged in this respect. These
considerations have induced me to publish some observations which will
perhaps help to further our knowledge concerning the relationship of
hysterical twilight-states and enlarge the problems of normal psychology.


CASE OF SOMNAMBULISM IN A PERSON WITH NEUROPATHIC INHERITANCE
(SPIRITUALISTIC MEDIUM).

The following case was under my observation in the years 1899 and
1900. As I was not in medical attendance upon Miss S. W., a physical
examination for hysterical stigmata unfortunately could not be made.
I kept a complete diary of the séances, which I filled up after each
sitting. The following report is a condensed account from these notes.
Out of regard for Miss S. W. and her family a few unimportant dates have
been altered and a few details omitted from the story, which for the
most part is composed of very intimate matters.

Miss S. W., 15 1/2 years old. Reformed Church. The paternal grandfather
was highly intelligent, a clergyman with frequent waking hallucinations
(generally visions, often whole dramatic scenes with dialogues, etc.).
A brother of the grandfather was an imbecile eccentric, who also saw
visions. A sister of the grandfather, a peculiar, odd character. The
paternal grandmother after some fever in her 20th year (typhoid?) had
a trance which lasted three days, from which she did not awake until
the crown of her head had been burned by a red-hot iron. During states
of excitement later on she had fainting fits which were nearly always
followed by a brief somnambulism during which she uttered prophesies.
Her father was likewise a peculiar, original personality with bizarre
ideas. All three had waking hallucinations (second-sight, forebodings,
etc.). A third brother was also eccentric and odd, talented but
one-sided. The mother has an inherited mental defect often bordering
on psychosis. The sister is a hysteric and visionary and a second
sister suffers from "nervous heart attacks." Miss S. W. is slenderly
built, skull somewhat rachitic, without pronounced hydrocephalus, face
rather pale, eyes dark with a peculiar penetrating look. She has had
no serious illnesses. At school she passed for average, showed little
interest, was inattentive. As a rule her behaviour was rather reserved,
sometimes giving place, however, to exuberant joy and exaltation. Of
average intelligence, without special gifts, neither musical nor fond
of books, her preference is for handwork--and day dreaming. She was
often absent-minded, misread in a peculiar way when reading aloud,
instead of the word _Ziege_ (goat), for instance, said _Gais_, instead
of _Treppe_ (stair), _Stege_; this occurred so often that her brothers
and sisters laughed at her. There were no other abnormalities; there
were no serious hysterical manifestations. Her family were artisans and
business people with very limited interests. Books of mystical content
were never permitted in the family. Her education was faulty; there
were numerous brothers and sisters and thus the education was given
indiscriminately, and in addition the children had to suffer a great
deal from the inconsequent and vulgar, indeed sometimes rough, treatment
of their mother. The father, a very busy business man, could not pay
much attention to his children, and died when S. W. was not yet grown
up. Under these uncomfortable conditions it is no wonder that S. W.
felt herself shut in and unhappy. She was often afraid to go home, and
preferred to be anywhere rather than there. She was left a great deal
with playmates and grew up in this way without much polish. The level
of her education is relatively low and her interests correspondingly
limited. Her knowledge of literature is also very limited. She knows
the common school songs by heart, songs of Schiller and Goethe and a
few other poets, as well as fragments from a song book and the psalms.
Newspaper stories represent her highest level in prose. Up to the time
of her somnambulism she had never read any books of a serious nature.
At home and from friends she heard about table-turning and began to
take an interest in it. She asked to be allowed to take part in such
experiments, and her desire was soon gratified. In July 1899, she took
part a few times in table-turnings with some friends and her brothers
and sisters, but in joke. It was then discovered that she was an
excellent "medium." Some communications of a serious nature arrived
which were received with general astonishment. Their pastoral tone
was surprising. The spirit said he was the grandfather of the medium.
As I was acquainted with the family I was able to take part in these
experiments. At the beginning of August, 1899, the first attacks of
somnambulism took place in my presence. They took the following course:
S. W. became very pale, slowly sank to the ground, or into a chair, shut
her eyes, became cataleptic, drew several deep breaths, and began to
speak. In this stage she was generally quite relaxed; the reflexes of
the lids remained, as did also tactile sensation. She was sensitive to
unexpected noises and full of fear, especially in the initial stage.

She did not react when called by name. In somnambulic dialogues she
copied in a remarkably clever way her dead relations and acquaintances,
with all their peculiarities, so that she made a lasting impression
upon unprejudiced persons. She also so closely imitated persons whom
she only knew from descriptions that no one could deny her at least
considerable talent as an actress. Gradually gestures were added to
the simple speech, which finally led to "_attitudes passionelles_" and
complete dramatic scenes. She took up postures of prayer and rapture,
with staring eyes, and spoke with impassionate and glowing rhetoric. She
then made use exclusively of a literary German which she spoke with an
ease and assurance quite contrary to her usual uncertain and embarrassed
manner in the waking state. Her movements were free and of a noble
grace, depicting most beautifully her varying emotions. Her attitude
during these states was always changing and diverse in the different
attacks. Now she would lie for ten minutes to two hours on the sofa or
the ground, motionless, with closed eyes; now she assumed a half-sitting
posture and spoke with changed tone and speech; now she would stand
up, going through every possible pantomimic gesture. Her speech was
equally diversified and without rule. Now she spoke in the first person,
but never for long, generally to prophesy her next attack; now she
spoke of herself (and this was the most usual) in the third person.
She then acted as some other person, either some dead acquaintance or
some chance person, whose part she consistently carried out according
to the characteristics she herself conceived. At the end of the ecstasy
there usually followed a cataleptic state with _flexibilitas cerea_,
which gradually passed over into the waking state. The waxy anæmic
pallor which was an almost constant feature of the attacks made one
really anxious; it sometimes occurred at the beginning of the attack,
but often in the second half only. The pulse was then small but regular
and of normal frequency; the breathing gentle, shallow, or almost
imperceptible. As already stated, S. W. often predicted her attacks
beforehand; just before the attacks she had strange sensations, became
excited, rather anxious, and occasionally expressed thoughts of death:
"she will probably die in one of these attacks; during the attack her
soul only hangs to her body by a thread, so that often the body could
scarcely go on living." Once after the cataleptic attack tachypnoea
lasting two minutes was observed, with a respiration rate of 100 per
minute. At first the attacks occurred spontaneously, afterwards S. W.
could provoke them by sitting in a dark corner and covering her face
with her hands. Frequently the experiment did not succeed. She had
so-called "good" and "bad" days. The question of amnesia after the
attacks is unfortunately very obscure. This much is certain, that after
each attack she was quite accurately orientated as to what she had gone
through "during the rapture." It is, however, uncertain how much she
remembered of the conversations in which she served as medium, and of
changes in her surroundings during the attack. It often seemed that
she did have a fleeting recollection, for directly after waking she
would ask: "Who was here? Wasn't X or Y here? What did he say?" She
also showed that she was superficially aware of the content of the
conversations. She thus often remarked that the spirits had communicated
to her before waking what they had said. But frequently this was not
the case. If, at her request, the contents of the trance speeches were
repeated to her she was often annoyed about them. She was then often
sad and depressed for hours together, especially when any unpleasant
indiscretions had occurred. She would then rail against the spirits and
assert that next time she would beg her guides to keep such spirits far
away. Her indignation was not feigned, for in the waking state she could
but poorly control herself and her emotions, so that every mood was at
once mirrored in her face. At times she seemed only slightly or not at
all aware of the external proceedings during the attack. She seldom
noticed when any one left the room or came in. Once she forbade me to
enter the room when she was awaiting special communications which she
wished to keep secret from me. Nevertheless I went in, and sat down with
the three other sitters and listened to everything. Her eyes were open
and she spoke to those present without noticing me. She only noticed me
when I began to speak, which gave rise to a storm of indignation. She
remembered better, but still apparently only in indefinite outlines, the
remarks of those taking part which referred to the trance speeches or
directly to herself. I could never discover any definite rapport in this
connection.

In addition to these great attacks which seemed to follow a certain law
in their course, S. W. produced a great number of other automatisms.
Premonitions, forebodings, unaccountable moods and rapidly changing
fancies were all in the day's work. I never observed simple states of
sleep. On the other hand, I soon noticed that in the middle of a lively
conversation S. W. became quite confused and spoke without meaning in
a peculiar monotonous way, and looked in front of her dreamily with
half-closed eyes. These lapses usually lasted but a few minutes. Then
she would suddenly proceed: "Yes, what did you say?" At first she
would not give any particulars about these lapses, she would reply
off-hand that she was a little giddy, had a headache, and so on.
Later she simply said: "they were there again," meaning her spirits.
She was subjected to the lapses much against her will; she often tried
to defend herself: "I do not want to, not now, come some other time;
you seem to think I only exist for you." She had these lapses in the
streets, in business, in fact anywhere. If this happened to her in
the street, she leaned against a house and waited till the attack was
over. During these attacks, whose intensity was most variable, she
had visions; frequently also, especially during the attacks where she
turned extremely pale, she "wandered"; or as she expressed it, lost
her body, and got away to distant places whither her spirits led her.
Distant journeys during ecstasy strained her exceedingly; she was
often exhausted for hours after, and many times complained that the
spirits had again deprived her of much power, such overstrain was now
too much for her; the spirits must get another medium, etc. Once she
was hysterically blind for half an hour after one of these ecstasies.
Her gait was hesitating, feeling her way; she had to be led; she did
not see the candle which was on the table. The pupils reacted. Visions
occurred in great numbers without proper "lapses" (designating by this
word only the higher grade of distraction of attention). At first the
visions only occurred at the beginning of the sleep. Once after S. W.
had gone to bed the room became lighted up, and out of the general foggy
light there appeared white glittering figures. They were throughout
concealed in white veil-like robes, the women had a head-covering like
a turban, and a girdle. Afterwards (according to the statements of S.
W.), "the spirits were already there" when she went to bed. Finally she
also saw the figures in bright daylight, though still somewhat blurred
and only for a short time, provided there were no proper lapses, in
which case the figures became solid enough to take hold of. But S. W.
always preferred darkness. According to her account the content of the
vision was for the most part of a pleasant kind. Gazing at the beautiful
figures she received a feeling of delicious blessedness. More rarely
there were terrible visions of a dæmonic nature. These were entirely
confined to the night or to dark rooms. Occasionally S. W. saw black
figures in the neighbouring streets or in her room; once out in the dark
courtyard she saw a terrible copper-red face which suddenly stared at
her and frightened her. I could not learn anything satisfactory about
the first occurrence of the vision. She states that once at night, in
her fifth or sixth year, she saw her "guide," her grandfather (whom she
had never known). I could not get any objective confirmation from her
relatives of this early vision. Nothing of the kind is said to have
happened until her first séance. With the exception of the hypnagogic
brightness and the flashes, there were no rudimentary hallucinations,
but from the beginning they were of a systematic nature, involving all
the sense-organs equally. So far as concerns the intellectual reaction
to these phenomena it is remarkable with what curious sincerity she
regarded her dreams. Her entire somnambulic development, the innumerable
puzzling events, seemed to her quite natural. She looked at her whole
past in this light. Every striking event of earlier years stood to her
in necessary and clear relationship to her present condition. She was
happy in the consciousness of having found her real life-task. Naturally
she was unswervingly convinced of the reality of her visions. I often
tried to present her with some sceptical explanation, but she invariably
turned this aside; in her usual condition she did not clearly grasp a
reasoned explanation, and in the semi-somnambulic state she regarded
it as senseless in view of the facts staring her in the face. She once
said: "I do not know if what the spirits say and teach me is true,
neither do I know if they are those by whose names they call themselves,
but that my spirits exist there is no question. I see them before me, I
can touch them, I speak to them about everything I wish, as naturally
as I'm now talking to you. They must be real." She absolutely would
not listen to the idea that the manifestations were a kind of illness.
Doubts about her health or about the reality of her dream would distress
her deeply; she felt so hurt by my remarks that when I was present she
became reserved, and for a long time refused to experiment if I was
there; hence I took care not to express my doubts and thoughts aloud.
From her immediate relatives and acquaintances she received undivided
allegiance and admiration--they asked her advice about all kinds of
things. In time she obtained such an influence upon her followers that
three of her brothers and sisters likewise began to have hallucinations
of a similar kind. Their hallucinations generally began as night-dreams
of a very vivid and dramatic kind; these gradually extended into the
waking time, partly hypnagogic, partly hypnopompic. A married sister
had extraordinary vivid dreams which developed from night to night,
and these appeared in the waking consciousness; at first as obscure
illusions, next as real hallucinations, but they never reached the
plastic clearness of S. W.'s visions. For instance, she once saw in a
dream a black dæmonic figure at her bedside in animated conversation
with a white, beautiful figure, which tried to restrain the black one;
nevertheless the black one seized her and tried to choke her, then
she awoke. Bending over her she then saw a black shadow with a human
contour, and near by a white cloudy figure. The vision only disappeared
when she lighted a candle. Similar visions were repeated dozens of
times. The visions of the other two sisters were of a similar kind, but
less intense.

This particular type of attack with the complete visions and ideas had
developed in the course of less than a month, but never afterwards
exceeded these limits. What was later added to these was but the
extension of all those thoughts and cycles of visions which to a
certain extent were already indicated quite at the beginning. As well
as the "great" attacks and the lesser ones, there must also be noted
a third kind of state comparable to "lapse" states. These are the
_semi-somnambulic states_. They appeared at the beginning or at the
end of the "great" attacks, but also appeared without any connection
with them. They developed gradually in the course of the first month.
It is not possible to give a more precise account of the time of their
appearance. In this state a fixed gaze, brilliant eyes, and a certain
dignity and stateliness of movement are noticeable. In this phase S. W.
is herself, her own somnambulic ego.

She is fully orientated to the external world, but seems to stand
with one foot, as it were, in her dream-world. She sees and hears her
spirits, sees how they walk about in the room among those who form
the circle, and stand first by one person, then by another. She is in
possession of a clear remembrance of her visions, her journeys and the
instructions she receives. She speaks quietly, clearly and firmly and
is always in a serious, almost religious frame of mind. Her bearing
indicates a deeply religious mood, free from all pietistic flavour, her
speech is singularly uninfluenced by her guide's jargon compounded of
Bible and tract. Her solemn behaviour has a suffering, rather pitiful
aspect. She is painfully conscious of the great differences between
her ideal world at night and the rough reality of the day. This state
stands in sharp contrast to her waking existence; there is here no
trace of that unstable and inharmonious creature, that extravagant
nervous temperament which is so characteristic for the rest of her
relationships. Speaking with her, you get the impression of speaking
with a much older person who has attained through numerous experiences
to a sure harmonious footing. In this state she produced her best
results, whilst her romances correspond more closely to the conditions
of her waking interests. The semi-somnambulism usually appears
spontaneously, mostly during the table experiments, which sometimes
announced by this means that S. W. was beginning to know beforehand
every automatic communication from the table. She then usually stopped
the table-turning and after a short time passed more or less suddenly
into an ecstatic state. S. W. showed herself to be very sensitive. She
could divine and reply to simple questions thought of by a member of the
circle who was not a "medium," if only the latter would lay a hand on
the table or on her hand. Genuine thought-transference without direct
or indirect contact could never be achieved. In juxtaposition with the
obvious development of her whole personality the continued existence of
her earlier ordinary character was all the more startling. She imparted
with unconcealed pleasure all the little childish experiences, the
flirtations and love-secrets, all the rudeness and lack of education
of her parents and contemporaries. To every one who did not know her
secret she was a girl of fifteen and a half, in no respect unlike a
thousand other such girls. So much the greater was people's astonishment
when they got to know her in her other aspect. Her near relatives could
not at first grasp this change: to some extent they never altogether
understood it, so there was often bitter strife in the family, some of
them taking sides for and others against S. W., either with enthusiastic
over-valuation or with contemptuous censure of "superstition." Thus
did S. W., during the time I watched her closely, lead a curious,
contradictory life, a real "double life" with two personalities existing
side by side or closely following upon one another and contending for
the mastery. I now give some of the most interesting details of the
sittings in chronological order.

First and second sittings, August, 1899. S. W. at once undertook to
lead the "communications." The "psychograph," for which an upturned
glass tumbler was used, on which two fingers of the right hand were
laid, moved quick as lightning from letter to letter. (Slips of paper,
marked with letter and numbers, had been arranged in a circle round
the glass.) It was communicated that the "medium's" grandfather was
present and would speak to us. There then followed many communications
in quick sequence, of a most religious, edifying nature, in part in
properly made words, partly in words with the letters transposed, and
partly in a series of reversed letters. The last words and sentences
were produced so quickly that it was not possible to follow without
first inverting the letters. The communications were once interrupted in
abrupt fashion by a new communication, which announced the presence of
the writer's grandfather. On this occasion the jesting observation was
made: "Evidently the two 'spirits' get on very badly together." During
this attempt darkness came on. Suddenly S. W. became very disturbed,
sprang up in terror, fell on her knees and cried "There, there, do you
not see that light, that star there?" and pointed to a dark corner of
the room. She became more and more disturbed, and called for a light in
terror. She was pale, wept, "it was all so strange, she did not know in
the least what was the matter with her." When a candle was brought she
became calm again. The experiments were now stopped.

At the next sitting, which took place in the evening, two days later,
similar communications from S. W.'s grandfather were obtained. When
darkness fell S. W. suddenly leaned back on the sofa, grew pale, almost
shut her eyes, and lay there motionless. The eyeballs were turned
upwards, the lid-reflex was present as well as tactile sensation. The
breathing was gentle, almost imperceptible. The pulse small and weak.
This attack lasted about half an hour, when S. W. suddenly sighed and
got up. The extreme pallor, which had lasted throughout the whole
attack, now gave place to her usual pale pink colour. She was somewhat
confused and distraught, indicated that she had seen all sorts of
things, but would tell nothing. Only after urgent questioning would
she relate that in an extraordinary waking condition she had seen her
grandfather arm-in-arm with the writer's grandfather. The two had gone
rapidly by in an open carriage, side by side.

III. In the third séance, which took place some days later, there was a
similar attack of more than half an hour's duration. S. W. afterwards
told of many white, transfigured forms who each gave her a flower
of special symbolic significance. Most of them were dead relatives.
Concerning the exact content of their talk she maintained an obstinate
silence.

IV. After S. W. had entered into the somnambulic state she began to make
curious movements with her lips, and made swallowing gurgling noises.
Then she whispered very softly and unintelligibly. When this had lasted
some minutes she suddenly began to speak in an altered deep voice. She
spoke of herself in the third person. "She is not here, she has gone
away." There followed several communications of a religious kind. From
the content and the way of speaking it was easy to conclude that she
was imitating her grandfather, who had been a clergyman. The content of
the talk did not rise above the mental level of the "communications."
The tone of the voice was somewhat forced, and only became natural when,
in the course of the talk, the voice approximated to the medium's own.

(In later sittings the voice was only altered for a few moments when a
new spirit manifested itself.)

Afterwards there was amnesia for the trance-conversation. She gave hints
about a sojourn in the other world, and she spoke of an undreamed-of
blessedness which she felt. It must be further noted that her
conversation in the attack occurred quite spontaneously, and was not in
response to any suggestions.

Directly after this séance S. W. became acquainted with the book of
Justinus Kerner, "Die Seherin von Prevorst." She began thereupon to
magnetise herself towards the end of the attack, partly by means of
regular passes, partly by curious circles and figures of eight, which
she described symmetrically with both arms. She did this, she said,
to disperse the severe headaches which occurred after the attacks. In
the August séances, not detailed here, there were in addition to the
grandfather numerous spirits of other relatives who did not produce
anything very remarkable. Each time when a new one came on the scene the
movement of the glass was changed in a striking way; it generally ran
along the rows of letters, touching one or other of them, but no sense
could be made of it. The orthography was very uncertain and arbitrary,
and the first sentences were frequently incomprehensible or broken
up into a meaningless medley of letters. Generally automatic writing
suddenly began at this point. Sometimes automatic writing was attempted
during complete darkness. The movements began with violent backward
jerks of the whole arm, so that the paper was pierced by the pencil. The
first attempt at writing consisted of numerous strokes and zigzag lines
about 8 cm. high. In later attempts there came first unreadable words,
in large handwriting, which gradually became smaller and clearer. It
was not essentially different from the medium's own. The grandfather was
again the controlling spirit.

V. Somnambulic attacks in September, 1899. S. W. sits upon the sofa,
leans back, shuts her eyes, breathes lightly and regularly. She
gradually becomes cataleptic, the catalepsy disappears after about
two minutes, when she lies in an apparently quiet sleep with complete
muscular relaxation. She suddenly begins to speak in a subdued voice:
"No! you take the red, I'll take the white, you can take the green,
and you the blue. Are you ready? We will go now." (A pause of several
minutes during which her face assumes a corpse-like pallor. Her hands
feel cold and are very bloodless.) She suddenly calls out with a
loud, solemn voice: "Albert, Albert, Albert," then whispering: "Now
you speak," followed by a longer pause, when the pallor of the face
attains the highest possible degree. Again, in a loud solemn voice,
"Albert, Albert, do you not believe your father? I tell you many errors
are contained in N.'s teaching. Think about it." Pause. The pallor
of the face decreases. "He's very frightened. He could not speak any
more." (These words in her usual conversational tone.) Pause. "He will
certainly think about it," S. W. now speaks again in the same tone,
in a strange idiom which sounds like French or Italian, now recalling
the former, now the latter. She speaks fluently, rapidly, and with
charm. It is possible to understand a few words but not to remember the
whole, because the language is so strange. From time to time certain
words recur, as _wena_, _wenes_, _wenai_, _wene_, etc. The absolute
naturalness of the proceedings is bewildering. From time to time she
pauses as if some one were answering her. Suddenly she speaks in German,
"Is time already up?" (In a troubled voice.) "Must I go already?
Goodbye, goodbye." With the last words there passes over her face an
indescribable expression of ecstatic blessedness. She raises her arms,
opens her eyes,--hitherto closed,--looks radiantly upwards. She remains
a moment thus, then her arms sink slackly, her eyes shut, the expression
of her face is tired and exhausted. After a short cataleptic stage she
awakes with a sigh. She looks around astonished: "I've slept again,
haven't I?" She is told she has been talking during the sleep, whereupon
she becomes much annoyed, and this increases when she learns she has
spoken in a foreign tongue. "But didn't I tell the spirits I don't want
it? It mustn't be. It exhausts me too much." Begins to cry. "Oh, God!
Oh, God! must then everything, everything, come back again like last
time? Is nothing spared me?" The next day at the same time there was
another attack. When S. W. has fallen asleep Ulrich von Gerbenstein
suddenly announces himself. He is an entertaining chatterer, speaks very
fluently in high German with a North-German accent. Asked what S. W. is
now doing, after much circumlocution he explains that she is far away,
and he is meanwhile here to look after her body, the circulation of the
blood, the respiration, etc. He must take care that meanwhile no black
person takes possession of her and harms her. Upon urgent questioning
he relates that S. W. has gone with the others to Japan, to appear to
a distant relative and to restrain him from a stupid marriage. He then
announces in a whisper the exact moment when the manifestation takes
place. Forbidden any conversation for a few minutes, he points to the
sudden pallor occurring in S. W., remarking that materialisation at such
a great distance is at the cost of correspondingly great force. He then
orders cold bandages to the head to alleviate the severe headache which
would occur afterwards. As the colour of the face gradually becomes more
natural the conversation grows livelier. All kinds of childish jokes and
trivialities are uttered; suddenly U. von G. says, "I see them coming,
but they are still very far off; I see them there like a star." S. W.
points to the North. We are naturally astonished, and ask why they do
not come from the East, whereto U. von G. laughingly retorts: "Oh, but
they come the direct way over the North Pole. I am going now; farewell."
Immediately after S. W. sighs, wakes up, is ill-tempered, complains of
extremely bad headache. She saw U. von G. standing by her body; what
had he told us? She gets angry about the "silly chatter" from which he
cannot refrain.

VI. Begins in the usual way. Extreme pallor; lies stretched out,
scarcely breathing. Speaks suddenly, with loud, solemn voice: "Yes,
be frightened; I am; I warn you against N.'s teaching. See, in hope
is everything that belongs to faith. You would like to know who I
am. God gives where one least expects it. Do you not know me?" Then
unintelligible whispering; after a few minutes she awakes.

VII. S. W. soon falls asleep; lies stretched out on the sofa. Is very
pale. Says nothing, sighs deeply from time to time. Casts up her eyes,
rises, sits on the sofa, bends forward, speaks softly: "You have sinned
grievously, have fallen far." Bends forward still, as if speaking to
some one who kneels before her. She stands up, turns to the right,
stretches out her hands, and points to the spot over which she has been
bending. "Will you forgive her?" she asks, loudly. "Do not forgive men,
but their spirits. Not she, but her human body has sinned." Then she
kneels down, remains quite still for about ten minutes in the attitude
of prayer. Then she gets up suddenly, looks to heaven with ecstatic
expression, and then throws herself again on her knees, with her face
bowed on her hands, whispering incomprehensible words. She remains rigid
in this position several minutes. Then she gets up, looks again upwards
with a radiant countenance, and lies down on the sofa; soon after she
wakes.


DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOMNAMBULIC PERSONALITIES.

At the beginning of many séances the glass was allowed to move by
itself, when occasionally the advice followed in stereotyped fashion:
"You must ask."

Since convinced spiritualists took part in the séances, all kinds
of spiritualistic wonders were of course demanded, and especially
the "protecting spirits." In reply, sometimes names of well-known
dead people were produced, sometimes unknown names, _e.g._ Berthe
de Valours, Elizabeth von Thierfelsenburg, Ulrich von Gerbenstein,
etc. The controlling spirit was almost without exception the medium's
grandfather, who once explained: "he loved her more than any one in
this world because he had protected her from childhood up, and knew
all her thoughts." This personality produced a flood of Biblical
maxims, edifying observations, and song-book verses; the following is a
specimen:--

                In true believing,
    To faith in God cling ever nigh,
    Thy heavenly comfort never leaving,
    Which having, man can never die.
    Refuge in God is peace for ever,
    When earthly cares oppress the mind;
    Who from the heart can pray is never
    Bowed down by fate, howe'er unkind.

Numerous similar elaborations betrayed by their banal, unctuous
contents their origin in some tract or other. When S. W. had to speak
in ecstasy, lively dialogues developed between the circle-members and
the somnambulic personality. The content of the answers received is
essentially just the same commonplace edifying stuff as that of the
psychographic communications. The character of this personality is
distinguished by its dry and tedious solemnity, rigorous conventionality
and pietistic virtue (which is not consistent with the historic
reality). The grandfather is the medium's guide and protector. During
the ecstatic state he gives all kinds of advice, prophesies later
attacks and the visions she will see on waking, etc. He orders cold
bandages, gives directions concerning the medium's lying down or the
date of the séances. His relationship to the medium is an extremely
tender one. In liveliest contrast to this heavy dream-person stands
a personality, appearing first sporadically, in the psychographic
communications of the first séance. It soon disclosed itself as the
dead brother of a Mr. R., who was then taking part in the séance. This
dead brother, Mr. P. R., was full of commonplaces about brotherly love
towards his living brother. He evaded particular questions in all
manner of ways. But he developed a quite astonishing eloquence towards
the ladies of the circle and in particular offered his allegiance to
one whom Mr. P. R. had never known when alive. He affirmed that he
had already cared very much for her in his lifetime, had often met
her in the street without knowing who she was, and was now uncommonly
delighted to become acquainted with her in this unusual manner. With
such insipid compliments, scornful remarks to the men, harmless childish
jokes, etc., he took up a large part of the séance. Several of the
members found fault with the frivolity and banality of this "spirit,"
whereupon he disappeared for one or two séances, but soon reappeared,
at first well-behaved, often indeed uttering Christian maxims, but
soon dropping back into the old tone. Besides these two sharply
differentiated personalities, others appeared who varied but little from
the grandfather's type; they were mostly dead relatives of the medium.
The general atmosphere of the first two months' séances was accordingly
solemnly edifying, disturbed only from time to time by Mr. P. R.'s
trivial chatter. Some weeks after the beginning of the séances, Mr. R.
left our circle, whereupon a remarkable change took place in Mr. P.
R.'s conversation. He became monosyllabic, came less often, and after a
few séances vanished altogether, later on he reappeared but with great
infrequency, and for the most part only when the medium was alone with
the particular lady mentioned. Then a new personality forced himself
into the foreground; in contrast to Mr. P. R., who always spoke the
Swiss dialect, this gentleman adopted an affected North-German way of
speaking. In all else he was an exact copy of Mr. P. R. His eloquence
was somewhat remarkable, since S. W. had only a very scanty knowledge of
high German, whilst this new personality, who called himself Ulrich von
Gerbenstein, spoke an almost faultless German, rich in charming phrases
and compliments.[20]

Ulrich von Gerbenstein was a witty chatterer, full of repartee, an
idler, a great admirer of the ladies, frivolous, and most superficial.

During the winter of 1899-1900 he gradually came to dominate
the situation more and more, and took over one by one all the
above-mentioned functions of the grandfather, so that under his
influence the serious character of the séances disappeared.

All suggestions to the contrary proved unavailing, and at last the
séances had on this account to be suspended for longer and longer
intervals. There is a peculiarity common to all these somnambulic
personalities which must be noted. They have access to the medium's
memory, even to the unconscious portion, they are also _au courant_ with
the visions which she has in the ecstatic state, but they have only
_the most superficial knowledge of her phantasies during the ecstasy_.
Of the somnambulic dreams they know only what they occasionally pick
up from the members of the circle. On doubtful points they can give no
information, or only such as contradicts the medium's explanations. The
stereotyped answer to these questions runs: "Ask Ivenes."[21] "Ivenes
knows." From the examples given of different ecstatic moments it is
clear that the medium's consciousness is by no means idle during the
trance, but develops a striking and multiplex phantastic activity.
For the reconstruction of S. W.'s somnambulic self we have to depend
altogether upon her several statements; for in the first place her
spontaneous utterances connecting her with the waking self are few,
and often irrelevant, and in the second very many of these ecstatic
states go by without gesture, and without speech, so that no conclusions
as to the inner happenings can afterwards be drawn from the external
appearances. _S. W. is almost totally amnesic for the automatic
phenomena during ecstasy as far as they come within the territory of
the new personalities of her ego. Of all the other phenomena, such as
loud talking, babbling, etc., which are directly connected with her own
ego she usually has a clear remembrance._ But in every case there is
complete amnesia only during the first few minutes after the ecstasy.
Within the first half-hour, during which there usually prevails a kind
of semi-somnambulism with a dreamlike manner, hallucinations, etc., the
amnesia gradually disappears, whilst fragmentary memories emerge of what
has occurred, but in a quite irregular and arbitrary fashion.

The later séances were usually begun by our hands being joined and laid
on the table, whereon the table at once began to move. Meanwhile S. W.
gradually became somnambulic, took her hands from the table, lay back
on the sofa, and fell into the ecstatic sleep. She sometimes related
her experiences to us afterwards, but showed herself very reticent if
strangers were present. After the very first ecstasy she indicated
that she played a distinguished _rôle_ among the spirits. She had
a special name, as had each of the spirits; hers was _Ivenes_; her
grandfather looked after her with particular care. In the ecstasy with
the flower-vision we learnt her special secret, hidden till then beneath
the deepest silence. During the séances in which her spirit spoke she
made long journeys, mostly to relatives, to whom she said she appeared,
or she found herself on the Other Side, in "That space between the
stars which people think is empty, but in which there are really very
many spirit-worlds." In the semi-somnambulic state which frequently
followed her attacks, she once described, in peculiar poetic fashion,
a landscape on the Other Side, "a wondrous, moon-lit valley, set aside
for the races not yet born." She represented her somnambulic ego as
being almost completely released from the body. It is a fully-grown but
small, black-haired woman, of pronounced Jewish type, clothed in white
garments, her head covered with a turban. She understands and speaks the
language of the spirits, "for spirits still, from old human custom, do
speak to one another, although they do not really need to, since they
mutually understand one another's thoughts." She "does not really always
talk with the spirits, but just looks at them, and so understands their
thoughts." She travels in the company of four or five spirits, dead
relatives, and visits her living relatives and acquaintances in order
to investigate their life and their way of thinking; she further visits
all places which lie within the radius of these spectral inhabitants.
From her acquaintanceship with Kerner's book, she discovered and
improved upon the ideas of the black spirits who are kept enchanted in
certain places, or exist partly beneath the earth's surface (compare
the "Seherin von Prevorst"). This activity caused her much trouble and
pain; in and after the ecstasy she complained of suffocating feelings,
violent headache, etc. But every fortnight, on Wednesdays, she could
pass the whole night in the garden on the Other Side in the company of
holy spirits. There she was taught everything concerning the forces
of the world, the endless complicated relationships and affinities of
human beings, and all besides about the laws of reincarnation, the
inhabitants of the stars, etc. Unfortunately only the system of the
world-forces and reincarnation achieved any expression. As to the other
matters she only let fall disconnected observations. For example, once
she returned from a railway journey in an extremely disturbed state. It
was thought at first something unpleasant had happened, till she managed
to compose herself, and said, "A star-inhabitant had sat opposite to
her in the train." From the description which she gave of this being,
I recognised a well-known elderly merchant I happened to know, who has
a rather unsympathetic face. In connection with this experience she
related all kinds of peculiarities of these star-dwellers; they have no
god-like souls, as men have, they pursue no science, no philosophy, but
in technical arts they are far more advanced than men. Thus on Mars a
flying-machine has long been in existence; the whole of Mars is covered
with canals, these canals are cleverly excavated lakes and serve for
irrigation. The canals are quite superficial; the water in them is very
shallow. The excavating caused the inhabitants of Mars no particular
trouble, for the soil there is lighter than the earth's. The canals are
nowhere bridged, but that does not prevent communication, for everything
travels by flying-machine. Wars no longer occur on the stars, for no
differences of opinion exist. The star-dwellers have not human bodies,
but the most laughable ones possible, such as one would never imagine.
Human spirits who are allowed to travel on the Other Side may not set
foot on the stars. Equally, wandering star-dwellers may not come to the
earth, but must remain at a distance of twenty-five metres above the
earth's surface. Should they transgress they remain in the power of the
earth, and must assume human bodies, and are only set free again after
their natural death. As men, they are cold, hard-hearted, cruel. S. W.
recognises them by a singular expression in which the "Spiritual" is
lacking, and by their hairless, eyebrowless, sharply-cut faces. Napoleon
was a star-dweller.

In her journeys she does not see the places through which she hastens.
She has a feeling of floating, and the spirits tell her when she is
at the right spot. Then, as a rule, she only sees the face and upper
part of the person to whom she is supposed to appear, or whom she
wishes to see. She can seldom say in what kind of surroundings she sees
this person. Occasionally she saw me, but only my head without any
surroundings. She occupied herself much with the enchanting of spirits,
and for this purpose she wrote oracular sayings in a foreign tongue,
on slips of paper which she concealed in all sorts of queer places. An
Italian murderer, presumably living in my house, and whom she called
Conventi, was specially displeasing to her. She tried several times
to cast a spell upon him, and without my knowledge hid several papers
about, on which messages were written; these were later found by chance.
One such, written in red ink, was as follows:

    -------------------               ------------------
    | Conventi        |               |  Conventi, go  |
    | Marche. 4 govi  |               |  orden, Astaf  |
    |         Ivenes. |               |     vent.      |
    -------------------               ------------------

                -------------------------------
                |    Gen palus, vent allis    |
                | ton prost afta ben genallis.|
                -------------------------------

Unfortunately, I never obtained any interpretation of this. S. W.
was quite inaccessible in this matter. Occasionally the somnambulic
Ivenes speaks directly to the public. She does so in dignified fashion,
rather precociously, but she is not wearisomely unctuous and impossibly
twaddling as are her two guides; she is a serious, mature person, devout
and pious, full of womanly tenderness and great modesty, always yielding
to the judgments of others. This expression of plaintive emotion and
melancholy resignation is peculiar to her. She looks beyond this
world, and unwillingly returns to reality; she bemoans her hard lot,
and her unsympathetic family surroundings. Associated with this there
is something elevated about her; she commands her spirits, despises
the twaddling chatter of Gerbenstein, consoles others, directs those
in distress, warns and protects them from dangers to body and soul.
She is the intermediary for the entire intellectual output of all
manifestations, but she herself ascribes it to the direction of the
spirits. It is Ivenes who entirely controls S. W.'s semi-somnambulic
state.

In semi-somnambulism S. W. gave some of those taking part in the
séances the opportunity to compare her with the "Seherin von Prevorst"
(Prophetess of Prevorst). This suggestion was not without results.
S. W. gave hints of earlier existences which she had already lived
through, and after a few weeks she suddenly disclosed a whole system of
reincarnations, although she had never before mentioned anything of the
kind. Ivenes is a spiritual being who is something more than the spirits
of other human beings. Every human spirit must incorporate himself
twice in the course of the centuries. But Ivenes must incorporate
herself at least once every two hundred years; besides herself only two
other persons have participated in this fate, namely, Swedenborg and
Miss Florence Cook (Crookes's famous medium). S. W. calls these two
personages her brother and sister. She gave no information about their
pre-existences. In the beginning of the nineteenth century Ivenes was
Frau Hauffe, the Prophetess of Prevorst; at the end of the eighteenth
century, a clergyman's wife in central Germany (locality unknown).
As the latter she was seduced by Goethe and bore him a child. In the
fifteenth century she was a Saxon countess, and had the poetic name of
Thierfelsenburg. Ulrich von Gerbenstein is a relative from that line.
The interval of 300 years, and her adventure with Goethe, must be atoned
for by the sorrows of the Prophetess of Prevorst. In the thirteenth
century she was a noblewoman of Southern France, called de Valours,
and was burnt as a witch. From the thirteenth century to the Christian
persecution under Nero there were numerous reincarnations of which S.
W. could give no detailed account. In the Christian persecution under
Nero she played a martyr's part. Then comes a period of obscurity till
the time of David, when Ivenes was an ordinary Jewess. After her death
she received from Astaf, an angel from a high heaven, the mandate for
her future wonderful career. In all her pre-existences she was a medium
and an intermediary in the intercourse between this side and the other.
Her brothers and sisters are equally old and have the like vocation. In
her various pre-existences she was sometimes married, and in this way
gradually founded a whole system of relationships with whose endless
complicated inter-relations she occupied herself in many ecstasies.
Thus, for example, about the eighth century she was the mother of her
earthly father and, moreover, of her grandfather, and mine. Hence the
striking friendship of these two old gentlemen, otherwise strangers. As
Mme. de Valours she was the present writer's mother. When she was burnt
as a witch the writer took it much to heart, and went into a cloister
at Rouen, wore a grey habit, became Prior, wrote a work on Botany and
died at over eighty years of age. In the refectory of the cloister
there hung a picture of Mme. de Valours, in which she was depicted in
a half-reclining position. (S. W. in the semi-somnambulic state often
took this position on the sofa. It corresponds exactly to that of Mme.
Recamier in David's well-known picture.) A gentleman who often took part
in the séances, who had some slight resemblance to the writer, was also
one of her sons from that period. Around this core of relationship
there grouped themselves, more or less intimately connected, all the
persons in any way related or known to her. One came from the fifteenth
century, another--a cousin--from the eighteenth century, and so on.

From the three great family stocks grew by far the greater part of the
present European peoples. She and her brothers and sisters are descended
from Adam, who arose by materialisation; the other then-existing
families, from whom Cain took his wife, were descended from apes. S. W.
produced from this circle of relationship an extensive family-gossip,
a very flood of romantic stories, piquant adventures, etc. Sometimes
the target of her romances was a lady acquaintance of the writer's who
for some undiscoverable reason was peculiarly antipathetic to her. She
declared that this lady was an incarnation of a celebrated Parisian
poisoner, who had achieved great notoriety in the eighteenth century.
She maintained that this lady still continued her dangerous work, but
in a much more ingenious way than formerly; through the inspiration of
the wicked spirits who accompany her she had discovered a liquid which
when merely exposed to the air attracted tubercle bacilli and formed
a splendid developing medium for them. By means of this liquid, which
she was wont to mix with the food, the lady had brought about the death
of her husband (who had indeed died of tuberculosis); also one of her
lovers, and of her own brother, for the sake of his inheritance. Her
eldest son was an illegitimate child by her lover. As a widow she had
secretly borne to another lover an illegitimate child, and finally she
had had an unnatural relationship with her own brother (who was later
on poisoned). In this way S. W. spun innumerable stories, in which she
believed quite implicitly. The persons of these stories appeared in
the drama of her visions, as did the lady before referred to, going
through the pantomime of making confession and receiving absolution
of sins. Everything interesting occurring in her surroundings was
incorporated in this system of romances, and given an order in the
network of relationships with a more or less exact statement as to
their pre-existences and the spirits influencing them. It fared thus
with all who made S. W.'s acquaintance: they were valued at a second or
first incarnation, according as they possessed a marked or indefinite
character. They were generally described as relatives, and always
exactly in the same definite way. Only subsequently, often several
weeks later, after an ecstasy, there would make its appearance a new
complicated romance which explained the striking relationship through
pre-existences or through illegitimate relations. Persons sympathetic to
S. W. were usually very near relatives. Most of these family romances
were very carefully made up, so that to contradict them was impossible.
They were always worked out with a quite bewildering certainty, and
surprised one by an extremely clever evaluation of certain details which
she had noticed or taken from somewhere. For the most part the romances
had a ghastly character, murder by poison and dagger, seduction and
divorce, forgery of wills, played the chief rôle.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mystic Science._--In reference to scientific questions S. W. put
forward numerous suggestions. Generally towards the end of the séances
there was talk and debate about various subjects of scientific and
spiritistic nature. S. W. never took part in the discussion, but
generally sat dreamily in a corner in a semi-somnambulic state. She
listened to one and another, taking hold of the talk in a half-dream,
but she could never relate anything connectedly; if asked about it
only partial explanations were given. In the course of the winter
hints emerged in various séances: "The spirits taught her about the
world-forces and the strange revelations from the other side, yet she
would not tell anything now." Once she tried to give a description,
but only said: "On one side was the light, on the other the power of
attraction." Finally, in March 1900, when for some time nothing had been
heard of the teachings at the séances, she announced suddenly with a
joyful face that she had now received everything from the spirits. She
drew out a long narrow strip of paper upon which were numerous names.
Although I asked for it she would not let it leave her hands, but
dictated the following scheme to me.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

I can remember clearly that in the course of the winter of 1895 we
spoke several times in S. W.'s presence of the forces of attraction and
repulsion in connection with Kant's "Natural History of the Heavens"; we
spoke also of the "Law of the Conservation of Energy," of the different
forces of energy, and of the question whether the force of gravity was
perhaps a form of movement. From this talk S. W. had plainly created the
foundation of her mystic system. She gave the following explanation:
The natural forces are arranged in seven circles. Outside these circles
are three more, in which unknown forces intermediate between energy
and matter are found. Matter is found in seven circles which surround
ten inner ones. In the centre stands the primary force, which is the
original cause of creation and is a spiritual force. The first circle
which surrounds the primary force is matter which is not really a
force and does not arise from the primary force, but it unites with
the primary force and from this union the first descendants are the
spiritual forces; on the one hand the Good or Light Powers, on the other
the Dark Powers. The Power Magnesor consists most of primary force; the
Power Connesor, in which the dark might of matter is greatest, contains
the least. The further outwards the primary force streams forth, the
weaker it becomes, but weaker too becomes the power of matter, since
its power is greatest where the collision with the primary power is
most violent, _i.e._ in the Power Connesor. Within the circles there
are fresh analogous forces of equal strength but making in the opposite
direction. The system can also be described in a single series beginning
with primary force, Magnesor, Cafor, etc., proceeding from left to right
on the scheme and ascending with Tusa, Endos, ending with Connesor; only
then the survey of the grade of intensity is made more difficult. Every
force in the outer circle is combined from the nearest adjacent forces
of the inner circle.

1. _The Magnesor Group._--The so-called powers of Light descend in
direct line from Magnesor, but slightly influenced by the dark side. The
powers Magnesor and Cafor form together the so-called Life Force, which
is no single power but is differently combined in animals and plants.
Between Magnesor and Cafor there exists the Life Force of Man. Morally
good men and those mediums who bring about interviews of good spirits
on the earth have most Magnesor. Somewhere about the middle there stand
the life forces of animals, and in Cafor that of plants. Nothing is
known about Hefa, or rather S. W. can give no information. Persus is the
fundamental power which comes to light in the phenomenon of the forces
of locomotion. Its recognisable forces are Warmth, Light, Electricity,
Magnetism, and two unknown forces, one of which only exists in comets.
Of the powers of the seventh circle S. W. could only point out north
and south magnetism and positive and negative electricity. _Deka_ is
unknown. _Smar_ is of peculiar significance, to be indicated below; it
leads to--

2. _Hypnos Group._--_Hypnos_ and _Hyfonismus_ are powers which only
dwell within certain beings, in those who are in a position to exert
a magnetic influence upon others. _Athialowi_ is the sexual instinct.
Chemical affinity is directly derived from it. In the ninth circle under
it arises indolence (that is the line of Smar). _Svens_ and _Kara_ are
of unknown significance. _Pusa_ corresponds to _Smar_ in the opposite
sense.

3. _The Connesor Group._--Connesor is the opposite pole of Magnesor. It
is the dark and wicked power equal in intensity to the good power of
light. While the good power creates, this one turns into the opposite.
Endos is an elemental power of minerals. From these (significance
unknown) gravitation proceeds, which on its side is designated as the
elemental force of the forces of resistance that occur in phenomena
(gravity, capillarity, adhesion and cohesion). Nakus is the secret
power of a rare stone which controls the effect of snake poison. The
two powers _Smar_ and _Pusa_ have a special importance. According to S.
W., _Smar_ develops in the bodies of morally good men at the moment of
death. This power enables the soul to rise to the powers of light. Pusa
behaves in the opposite way, for it is the power which conducts morally
bad people to the dark side in the state of Connesor.

In the sixth circle the visible world begins, which only appears to be
so sharply divided from the other side in consequence of the fickleness
of our organs of sense. In reality the transition is a very gradual one,
and there are people who live on a higher stage of knowledge because
their perceptions and sensations are more delicate than those of others.
Great seers are enabled to see manifestations of force where ordinary
people can perceive nothing. S. W. sees Magnesor as a white or bluish
vapour, which chiefly develops when good spirits are near. Connesor is a
dark vapour-like fluid, which, like Magnesor, develops on the appearance
of "black" spirits. For instance, the night before the beginning of
great visions the shiny vapour of Magnesor spreads in thick layers, out
of which, the good spirits grow to visible white forces. It is just
the same with Connesor. But these powers have their different mediums.
S. W. is a Magnesor medium, as were the Prophetess of Prevorst and
Swedenborg. The materialisation mediums of the spiritualists are mostly
Connesor mediums, because materialisation takes place much more easily
through Connesor on account of its close connection with the properties
of matter. In the summer of 1900 S. W. tried several times to produce
the circles of matter, but she never arrived at other than vague and
incomprehensible hints and afterwards spoke no more about this.

_Conclusion._--The really interesting and valuable séances came to an
end with the production of the system of powers. Before this a gradual
decline in the vividness of the ecstasies was noticeable. Ulrich von
Gerbenstein came increasingly to the front, and filled up the séances
with his childish chatter. The visions which S. W. had in the meantime
likewise seem to have lost vividness and plasticity of formation, for S.
W. was afterwards only able to feel pleasant sensations in the presence
of good spirits, and disagreeableness in that of bad spirits. Nothing
new was produced. There was something of uncertainty in the trance
talks, as if feeling and seeking for the impression which she was making
upon the audience, together with an increasing staleness in the content.
In the outward behaviour of S. W. there arose also a marked shyness
and uncertainty, so that the impression of wilful deception became
ever stronger. The writer therefore soon withdrew from the séances. S.
W. experimented afterwards in other circles, and six months after my
leaving was caught cheating _in flagranti delicto_. She wanted to arouse
again by spiritualistic experiments the lost belief in her supernatural
powers; she concealed small objects in her dress, throwing them up in
the air during the dark séance. With this her part was played out. Since
then, eighteen months have passed during which I have not seen S. W. I
have learnt from an observer who knew her in the earlier days, that
she has now and again strange states of short duration during which she
is very pale and silent, and has a fixed glittering look. I did not
hear any more of visions. She is said not to take part any longer in
spiritualistic séances. S. W. is now in a large business, and according
to all accounts is an industrious and responsible person who does her
work eagerly and cleverly, giving entire satisfaction. According to the
account of trustworthy persons, her character has much improved; she has
become quieter, more regular and sympathetic. No other abnormalities
have appeared in her. This case, in spite of its incompleteness,
contains a mass of psychological problems whose exposition goes far
beyond the limits of this little work. We must therefore be satisfied
with a mere sketch of the various striking manifestations. For the sake
of a more lucid exposition it seems better to review the various states
separately.

1. The _Waking State_.--Here the patient shows various peculiarities.
As we have seen, at school she was often distracted, lost herself in
a peculiar way, was moody; her behaviour changes inconsequently, now
quiet, shy, reserved, now lively, noisy and talkative. She cannot be
called unintelligent, but she strikes one sometimes as narrow-minded,
sometimes as having isolated intelligent moments. Her memory is good
on the whole, but owing to her distraction it is much impaired.
Thus, despite much discussion and reading of Kerner's "Seherin von
Prevorst," for many weeks, she does not know, if directly asked,
whether the author's name is _Koerner_ or _Kerner_, nor the name of
the Prophetess. All the same, when it occasionally comes up, the
name _Kerner_ is correctly written in the automatic communications.
In general it may be said that her character has something extremely
impulsive, incomprehensible, protean. Deducting the want of balance
due to puberty, there remains a pathological residue which expresses
itself in reactions which follow no rule and a bizarre unaccountable
character. This character may be called _déséquilibré_, or unstable. Its
specific mould is derived from traits which can certainly be regarded
as hysterical. This is decidedly so in the conditions of distraction.
As Janet[22] maintains, the foundation of hysterical anæsthesia is
the loss of attention. He was able to prove in youthful hysterics "a
striking indifference and distracted attention in the whole region of
the emotional life." Misreading is a notable instance, which beautifully
illustrates hysterical dispersion of attention. The psychology of
this process may perhaps be viewed as follows: during reading aloud
attention becomes paralysed for this act and is directed towards some
other object. Meanwhile the reading is continued mechanically, the
sense impressions are received as before, but in consequence of the
dispersion the excitability of the perceptive centre is lowered, so
that the strength of the sense impression is no longer adequate to fix
the attention in such a way that perception as such is conducted along
the motor speech route; thus all the inflowing associations which at
once unite with any new sense impression are repressed. The further
psychological mechanism permits of only two possible explanations:
(1) The admission of the sense impression is received unconsciously
(because of the increase of threshold stimulus), in the perceptive
centre just below the threshold of consciousness, and consequently is
not incorporated in the attention and conducted back to the speech
route. It only reaches verbal expression through the intervention of the
nearest associations, in our case through the dialect expression[23] for
the object. (2) The sense impression is perceived consciously, but at
the moment of its entrance into the speech route it reaches a territory
whose excitability is diminished by the dispersion of attention. At
this place the dialect word is substituted by association for the motor
speech image, and it is uttered as such. In either case it is certain
that it is the acoustic dispersed attention which fails to correct
the error. Which of the two explanations is correct cannot be proved
in this case; probably both approach the truth, for the dispersion of
attention seems to be general, and in each case concerns more than one
of the centres engaged in the act of reading aloud. In our case this
phenomenon has a special value, for we have here a quite elementary
automatic phenomenon. It may be called hysterical in so far as in this
concrete case a state of exhaustion and intoxication, with its parallel
manifestations, can be excluded. A healthy person only exceptionally
allows himself to be so engaged by an object that he fails to correct
the errors of a dispersed attention--those of the kind described. The
frequency of these occurrences in the patient point to a considerable
limitation of the field of consciousness, in so far as she can only
master a relative minimum of elementary sensations flowing in at the
same time. If we wish to describe more exactly the psychological state
of the "psychic shady side," we might call it either a sleeping or a
dream-state, according as passivity or activity predominated. There
is, at all events, a pathological dream-state of very rudimentary
extension and intensity and its genesis is spontaneous; dream-states
arising spontaneously, with the production of automatisms, are generally
regarded as hysterical on the whole. It must be pointed out that these
instances of misreading occurred frequently in our subject, and that the
term hysterical is employed in this sense; so far as we know, it is only
on a foundation of hysterical constitution that spontaneous states of
partial sleep or dreams occur frequently.

Binet[24] has studied experimentally the automatic substitution of some
adjacent association in his hysterics. If he pricked the anæsthetic
hand of the patient without his noticing the prick, he thought of
"points"; if the anæsthetic finger was moved, he thought of "sticks"
or "columns." When the anæsthetic hand, concealed from the patient's
sight by a screen, writes "Salpêtrière," she sees in front of her the
word "Salpêtrière" in white writing on a black ground. This recalls the
experiments above referred to of Guinon and Sophie Waltke.

We thus find in our subject, at a time when there was nothing to
indicate the later phenomena, rudimentary automatisms, fragments of
dream manifestations, which imply in themselves the possibility that
some day more than one association would creep in between the perception
of the dispersed attention and consciousness. The misreading shows us,
moreover, a certain automatic independence of the psychical elements.
This occasionally expands to a more or less fleeting dispersion of
attention, although with very slight results which are never in any
way striking or suspicious; this dispersedness approximates to that
of the physiological dream. The misreading can be thus conceived as a
prodromal symptom of the later events; especially as its psychology is
prototypical for the mechanism of somnambulic dreams, which are indeed
nothing but a many-sided multiplication and manifold variation of the
elementary processes reviewed above. I never succeeded in demonstrating
during my observations similar rudimentary automatisms. It would seem
that in course of time the states of dispersed attention, to a certain
extent beneath the surface of consciousness, at first of low degree have
grown into these remarkable somnambulic attacks; hence they disappeared
during the waking state, which was free from attacks. So far as concerns
the development of the patient's character, beyond a certain not very
extensive ripening, no remarkable change could be demonstrated during
the observations lasting nearly two years. More remarkable is the fact
that in the two years since the cessation (complete?) of the somnambulic
attacks, a considerable change in character has taken place. We shall
have occasion later on to speak of the importance of this observation.

_Semi-Somnambulism._--In S. W.'s case the following condition was
indicated by the term semi-somnambulism. For some time after and before
the actual somnambulic attack the patient finds herself in a state
whose most salient feature can best be described as "preoccupation."
She only lends half an ear to the conversation around her, answers at
random, often gets absorbed in all manner of hallucinations; her face
is solemn, her look ecstatic, visionary, ardent. Closer observation
discloses a far-reaching alteration of the entire character. She is
now serious, dignified; when she speaks her subject is always an
extremely serious one. In this condition she can talk so seriously,
forcibly and convincingly, that one is tempted to ask oneself if this is
really a girl of fifteen and a half. One has the impression of a mature
woman possessed of considerable dramatic talent. The reason for this
seriousness, this solemnity of behaviour, is given in her explanation
that at these times she stands at the frontier of this world and the
other, and associates just as truly with the spirits of the dead as
with living people. And, indeed, her conversation is usually divided
between answers to real objective questions and hallucinatory ones. I
call this state semi-somnambulism because it coincides with Richet's
own definition. He[25] says: "La conscience de cet individu persiste
dans son intégrité apparente, toutefois des opérations très compliquées
vont s'accomplir en dehors de la conscience sans que le moi volontaire
et conscient paraisse ressentir une modification quelconque. Une autre
personne sera en lui qui agira, pensera, voudra, sans que la conscience,
c'est à dire le moi réfléchi conscient, aît la moindre notion."

Binet[26] says of this term: "Le terme indique la parenté de cet état
avec le somnambulisme véritable, et en suite il laisse comprendre que
la vie somnambulique qui se manifeste durant la veille est réduite,
déprimée, par la conscience normale qui la recouvre."


AUTOMATISMS.

Semi-somnambulism is characterised by the continuity of consciousness
with that of the waking state and by the appearance of various
automatisms which give evidence of an activity of the subconscious self,
independent of that of consciousness.

Our case shows the following automatic phenomena:

(1) Automatic movements of the table.

(2) Automatic writing.

(3) Hallucinations.

1. _Automatic Movements of the Table._--Before the patient came
under my observation she had been influenced by the suggestion of
"table-turning," which she had first come across as a game. As soon as
she entered the circle there appeared communications from members of
her family which showed her to be a medium. I could only find out that,
as soon as ever her hand was placed on the table, the typical movements
began. The resulting communications have no interest for us. But the
automatic character of the act itself deserves some discussion, for
we may, without more ado, set aside the imputation that there was any
question of intentional and voluntary pushing or pulling on the part of
the patient.

As we know from the investigations of Chevreul,[27] Gley, Lehmann
and others, unconscious motor phenomena are not only of frequent
occurrence among hysterical persons, and those pathologically inclined
in other directions, but they are also relatively easily produced in
normal persons who show no other spontaneous automatisms. I have made
many experiments on these lines, and can confirm this observation.
In the great majority of instances all that is required is enough
patience to put up with an hour of quiet waiting. In most subjects,
motor automatisms will be obtained in a more or less high degree if
contra-suggestions do not intervene as obstacles. In a relatively small
percentage the phenomena arise spontaneously, _i.e._ directly under
the influence of verbal suggestion or of some earlier auto-suggestion.
In this instance the case is powerfully affected by suggestion. In
general, the particular predisposition is subject to all those laws
which also hold good for normal hypnosis. Nevertheless, certain
special circumstances are to be taken into account, conditioned by the
peculiarity of the case. It is not a question of a total hypnosis, but
of a partial one, limited entirely to the motor area of the arm, like
the cerebral anæsthesia produced by "magnetic passes" for a painful spot
in the body. We touch the spot in question employing verbal suggestion
or making use of some existing auto-suggestion, using the tactile
stimulus which we know acts suggestively, to bring about the desired
partial hypnosis. In accordance with this procedure, refractory subjects
can be brought easily enough to an exhibition of automatism. The
experimenter intentionally gives the table a slight push, or, better, a
series of rhythmic but very slight taps. After a short time he notices
that the oscillations become stronger, that they continue although
he has interrupted his own intentional movements. The experiment has
succeeded, the subject has unsuspectingly taken up the suggestion. By
this procedure much more is obtained than by verbal suggestion. In very
receptive persons and in all those cases where movement seems to arise
spontaneously, the purposeful tremulous movements,[28] not perceptible
by the subject, assume the _rôle_ of _agent provocateur_.

In this way persons who, by themselves, have never obtained automatic
movements of a coarse calibre, sometimes assume the unconscious guidance
of the table-movements, provided that the tremors are strong and that
the medium understands their meaning. In this case the medium takes
control of the slight oscillations and returns them considerably
strengthened, but rarely at exactly the same instant, generally a
few seconds later, in this way revealing the agent's conscious or
unconscious thought. By means of this simple mechanism there may arise
those cases of thought-reading so bewildering at first sight. A very
simple experiment, that succeeds in many cases even with unpractised
persons, will serve to illustrate this. The experimenter thinks, say,
of the number _four_, and then waits, his hands quietly resting on
the table, until he feels that the table makes the first inclination
to announce the number thought of. He lifts his hands off the table
immediately, and the number _four_ will be correctly tilted out. It
is advisable in this experiment to place the table upon a soft thick
carpet. By close attention the experimenter will occasionally notice a
movement of the table which is thus represented.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

(1) Purposeful tremors too slight to be perceived by the subject.

(2) Several very small but perceptible oscillations of the table which
indicate that the subject is responding to them.

(3) The big movements (tilts) of the table, giving the number four that
was thought of.

(_ab_) Denotes the moment when the operator's hands are removed.

This experiment succeeds excellently with well-disposed but
inexperienced subjects. After a little practice the phenomenon indicated
is wont to disappear, since by practice the number is read and
reproduced directly from the purposeful movements.[29]

In a responsive medium these purposeful tremors of the experimenter
act just as the intentional taps in the experiment cited above; they
are received, strengthened and reproduced, although slightly wavering.
Still they are perceptible and hence act suggestively as slight tactile
stimuli, and by the increase of partial hypnosis give rise to great
automatic movements. This experiment illustrates in the clearest way
the increase step by step of auto-suggestion. Along the path of this
auto-suggestion are developed all the automatic phenomena of a motor
nature. How the intellectual content gradually mingles in with the
purely motor need scarcely be elucidated after this discussion. There
is no need of a special suggestion for the evoking of intellectual
phenomena. From the outset it is a question of word-presentation, at
least from the side of the experimenter. After the first aimless motor
irrelevancies of the unpractised subject, some word-products or the
intentions of the experimenter are soon reproduced. Objectively the
occurrence of an intellectual content must be understood as follows:--

By the gradual increase of auto-suggestion the motor-range of the arm
becomes isolated from consciousness, that is to say, the perception of
the slight movement-impulse is concealed from consciousness.[30]

By the knowledge gained from consciousness that some intellectual
content is possible, there results a collateral excitation in the
speech-area as the means immediately at hand for intellectual
notification. The motor part of word-presentation is necessarily
chiefly concerned with this aiming at notification.[31] In this way
we understand the unconscious flowing over of speech-impulse to the
motor-area[32] and conversely the gradual penetration of partial
hypnosis into the speech-area.

In numerous experiments with beginners, as a rule I have observed
at the beginning of intellectual phenomena a relatively large number
of completely meaningless words, also often a series of meaningless
single letters. Later on, all kinds of absurdities are produced, _e.g._
words or entire sentences with the letters irregularly misplaced or
with the order of the letters all reversed--a kind of mirror-writing.
The appearance of the letter or word indicates a new suggestion; some
sort of association is involuntarily joined to it, which is then
realised. Remarkably enough, these are not generally the conscious
associations, but quite unexpected ones, a circumstance showing that a
considerable part of the speech-area is already hypnotically isolated.
The recognition of this automatism again forms a fruitful suggestion,
since invariably at this moment the feeling of strangeness arises, if it
is not already present in the pure motor-automatism. The question, "Who
is doing this?" "Who is speaking?", is the suggestion for the synthesis
of the unconscious personality which as a rule does not like being kept
waiting too long. Any name is introduced, generally one charged with
emotion, and the automatic splitting of the personality is accomplished.
How accidental and how vacillating this synthesis is at its beginning,
the following reports from the literature show. Myers[33] communicates
the following interesting observation on a Mr. A., a member of the
Society for Psychical Research, who was making experiments on himself in
automatic writing.


THIRD DAY.

Question: What is man?

Answer: TEFI H HASL ESBLE LIES.

Is that an anagram? Yes.

How many words does it contain? Five.

What is the first word? SEE.

What is the second word? SEEEE.

See? Shall I interpret it myself? Try to.

Mr. A. found this solution: "Life is less able." He was astonished
at this intellectual information, which seemed to him to prove the
existence of an intelligence independent of his own. Therefore he went
on to ask:

Who are you? Clelia.

Are you a woman? Yes.

Have you ever lived upon the earth? No.

Will you come to life? Yes.

When? In six years.

Why are you conversing with me? E if Clelia el.

Mr. A. interpreted this answer as: I Clelia feel.


FOURTH DAY.

Question: Am I the one who asks the questions? Yes.

Is Clelia there? No.

Who is here then? Nobody.

Does Clelia exist at all? No.

With whom then was I speaking yesterday? With no one.

       *       *       *       *       *

Janet[34] conducted the following conversation with the subconsciousness
of Lucie, who, meanwhile, was engaged in conversation with another
observer. "M'entendez-vous?" asks Janet. Lucie answers by automatic
writing, "Non." "Mais pour répondre il faut entendre?" "Oui,
absolument." "Alors comment faites-vous?" "Je ne sais." "Il faut bien
qu'il y ait quelqu'un qui m'entend?" "Oui." "Qui cela! Autre que Lucie.
Eh bien! Une autre personne. Voulez-vous que nous lui donnions un
nom?" "Non." "Si, ce sera plus commode," "Eh bien, Adrienne!" "Alors,
Adrienne, m'entendez-vous?" "Oui."

From these quotations it will be seen in what way the subconscious
personality is constructed. It owes its origin purely to suggestive
questions meeting a certain disposition of the medium. The explanation
is the result of the disintegration of the psychical complex; the
feeling of the strangeness of such automatisms then comes in to help, as
soon as conscious attention is directed to the automatic act. Binet[35]
remarks on this experiment of Janet's: "Il faut bien remarquer que si
la personnalité d'Adrienne a pu se créer, c'est qu'elle a rencontré
une possibilité psychologique; en d'autres termes, il y avait là des
phénomènes désagrégés vivant séparés de la conscience normale du
sujet." The individualisation of the subconsciousness always denotes a
considerable further step of great suggestive influence upon the further
formation of automatisms.[36] So, too, we must regard the origin of the
unconscious personalities in our case.

The objection that there is simulation in automatic table-turning may
well be given up, when one considers the phenomenon of thought-reading
from the purposeful tremors which the patient offered in such plenitude.
Rapid, conscious thought-reading demands at the least an extraordinary
degree of practice, which it has been shown the patient did not
possess. By means of the purposeful tremors whole conversations can
be carried on, as in our case. In the same way the suggestibility
of the subconscious can be proved objectively if, for instance, the
experimenter with his hand on the table desires that the hand of
the medium should no longer be able to move the table or the glass;
contrary to all expectation and to the liveliest astonishment of
the subject, the table will immediately remain immovable. Naturally
any other desired suggestions can be realised, provided they do not
overstep by their innervations the region of partial hypnosis; this
proves at the same time the limited nature of the hypnosis. Suggestions
for the legs and the other arm will thus not be obeyed. Table-turning
was not an automatism which belonged exclusively to the patient's
semi-somnambulism: on the contrary, it occurred in the most pronounced
form in the waking state, and in most cases then passed over into
semi-somnambulism, the appearance of this being generally announced by
hallucinations, as it was at the first sitting.

2. _Automatic Writing._--A second automatic phenomenon, which at
the outset corresponds to a higher degree of partial hypnosis, is
automatic writing. It is, according to my experience, much rarer and
more difficult to produce than table-turning. As in table-turning,
it is again a matter of a primary suggestion, to the conscious when
sensibility is retained, to the unconscious when it is obliterated.
The suggestion is, however, not a simple one, for it already bears in
itself an intellectual element. "To write" means "to write something."
This special element of the suggestion, which extends beyond the
merely motor, often conditions a certain perplexity on the part of the
subject, giving rise to slight contrary suggestions which hinder the
appearance of the automatisms. I have observed in a few cases that the
suggestion is realised, despite its relative venturesomeness (_e.g._
one directed towards the waking consciousness of a so-called normal
person). However, it takes place in a peculiar way; it first displaces
the purely motor part of the central system concerned in hypnosis, and
the deeper hypnosis is then reached by auto-suggestion from the motor
phenomenon, analogous to the procedure in table-turning described above.
The subject,[37] who has a pencil in his hand, is purposely engaged in
conversation whilst his attention is diverted from the writing. The hand
begins to make movements, beginning with many upward strokes and zigzag
lines, or a simple line is made. Occasionally it happens that the pencil
does not touch the paper, but writes in the air. These movements must be
conceived as purely motor phenomena, which correspond to the expression
of the motor element in the presentation "write." This phenomenon is
somewhat rare; generally single letters are first written, and what was
said above of table-turning holds true of their combination into words
and sentences. True mirror-writing is also observed here and there. In
the majority of cases, and perhaps in all experiments with beginners
who are not under some very special suggestion, the automatic writing
is that of the subject. Occasionally its character may be greatly
changed,[38] but this is secondary, and is always to be regarded as a
symptom of the intruding synthesis of a subconscious personality.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

As stated, the patient's automatic writing never came to any very great
development. In these experiments, generally carried out in darkness,
she passed over into semi-somnambulism, or into ecstasy. The automatic
writing had thus the same effect as the preliminary table-turning.

3. _The Hallucinations._--The nature of the passing into somnambulism
in the second séance is of psychological importance. As stated, the
automatic phenomena were progressing favourably when darkness came on.
The most interesting event of this séance, so far, was the brusque
interruption of the communication from the grandfather, which was the
starting-point of various debates amongst the members of the circle.
These two momentous occurrences, the darkness and the striking event,
seem to have been the foundation for a rapid deepening of hypnosis,
in consequence of which the hallucinations could be developed. The
psychological mechanism of this process seems to be as follows. The
influence of darkness upon the suggestibility of the sense-organs
is well known.[39] Binet[40] states that it has a special influence
on hysterics, producing a state of sleepiness. As is clear from the
foregoing, the patient was in a state of partial hypnosis and had
constituted herself one with the unconscious personality in closest
relationship to her in the domain of speech. The automatic expression
of this personality is interrupted most unexpectedly by a new person,
of whose existence no one had any suspicion. Whence came this cleavage?
Obviously the eager expectation of this first séance had very much
occupied the patient. Her reminiscences of me and my family had probably
grouped themselves around this expectation; hence these suddenly come
to light at the climax of the automatic expression. That it was just
my grandfather and no one else--not, _e.g._, my deceased father, who,
as she knew, was much closer to me than the grandfather whom I had
never known--perhaps suggests where the origin of this new person
is to be sought. It is probably a dissociation of the personality
already present which seized upon the material next at hand for its
expression, namely, upon the associations concerning myself. How far
this is parallel to the experiences revealed by dream investigation
(Freud's[41]) must remain undecided, for we have no means of judging how
far the effect mentioned can be considered a "repressed" one. From the
brusque interruption of the new personality, we may conclude that the
presentations concerned were very vivid, with corresponding intensity
of expectation. This perhaps was an attempt to overcome a certain
maidenly shyness and embarrassment. This event reminds us vividly of the
manner in which the dream presents to consciousness, by a more or less
transparent symbolism, things one has never said to oneself clearly and
openly. We do not know when this dissociation of the new personality
occurred, whether it had been slowly prepared in the unconscious,
or whether it first occurred in the séance. In any case, this event
meant a considerable increase in the extension of the unconscious
sphere rendered accessible through the hypnosis. At the same time
this event must be regarded as powerfully suggestive in regard to the
impression which it made upon the waking consciousness of the patient.
For the perception of this unexpected intervention of a new power must
inevitably excite a feeling of the strangeness of the automatisms,
and would easily suggest the thought that an independent spirit is
here making itself known. Hence the intelligible association that she
would finally be able to see this spirit. The situation that ensued
at the second séance is to be explained by the coincidence of this
energising suggestion with the heightened suggestibility conditioned
by the darkness. The hypnosis, and with it the series of dissociated
presentations, break through to the visual area, and the expression of
the unconscious, hitherto purely motor, is made objective, according
to the measure of the specific energy of the new system, in the shape
of visual images with the character of hallucinations; not as a mere
accompanying phenomenon of the word-automatism, but as a substituted
function. The explanation of the situation that arose in the first
séance, at that time unexpected and inexplicable, is no longer presented
in words, but as a descriptive allegorical vision. The sentence "they
do not hate one another, but are friends," is expressed in a picture.
We often encounter events of this kind in somnambulism. The thinking of
somnambulists is given in plastic images which constantly break into
this or that sense-sphere and are made objective in hallucinations. The
process of reflection sinks into the subconscious; only its end-results
arise to consciousness either as presentations vividly tinged by the
senses, or directly as hallucinations. In our case the same thing
occurred as in the patient whose anæsthetic hand Binet pricked nine
times, making her think of the figure 9; or as in Flournoy's[42] Helen
Smith, who, when asked during business-hours about certain patterns,
suddenly saw the number of days (18) for which they had been lent, at
a length of 20 mm. in front of her. The further question arises, why
does the automatism appear in the visual and not in the acoustic sphere?
There are several grounds for this choice of the visual sphere.

(1) The patient is not gifted acoustically; she is, for instance, very
unmusical.

(2) There was no stillness corresponding to the darkness which might
have favoured the appearance of sounds; there was a lively conversation.

(3) The increased conviction of the near presence of spirits, because
the automatism felt so strange, could easily have aroused the idea that
a spirit might be seen, thus causing a slight excitation of the visual
sphere.

(4) The entoptic phenomena in darkness favoured the occurrence of
hallucinations.

The reasons (3) and (4)--the entoptic phenomena in the darkness and the
probable excitation of the visual sphere--are of decisive importance
for the appearance of hallucinations. The entoptic phenomena in this
case play the same rôle in the auto-suggestion, the production of
the automatism, as the slight tactile stimuli in hypnosis of the
motor centre. As stated, flashes preceded the first hallucinatory
twilight-state. Obviously attention was already at a high pitch, and
directed to visual perceptions, so that the retina's own light, usually
very weak, was seen with great intensity. The part played by entoptic
perceptions of light in the origin of hallucinations deserves further
consideration. Schüle[43] says: "The swarming of light and colour which
stimulates and animates the field of vision, although in the dark,
supplies the material for phantastic figures in the air before falling
asleep. As we know, absolute darkness is never seen; a few particles
of the dark field of vision are always illumined; flecks of light move
here and there, and combine into all kinds of figures; it only needs a
moderately active imagination to create out of them, as one does out
of clouds, certain known figures. The power of reasoning, fading as one
falls asleep, leaves phantasy free play to construct very vivid figures.
In the place of the light spots, haziness and changing colours of the
dark visual field, there arise definite outlines of objects."[44]

In this way hypnagogic hallucinations arise. The chief _rôle_ naturally
belongs to the imagination, hence imaginative people in particular are
subject to hypnagogic hallucinations.[45] The hypnopompic hallucinations
described by Myers arise in the same way.

It is highly probable that hypnagogic pictures are identical with
the dream-pictures of normal sleep--forming their visual foundation.
Maury[46] has proved from self-observation that the pictures which
hovered around him hypnagogically were also the objects of the
dreams that followed. G. Trumbull Ladd[47] has shown this even more
convincingly. By practice he succeeded in waking himself suddenly two
to five minutes after falling asleep. He then observed that the figures
dancing before the retina at times represented the same contours as
the pictures just dreamed of. He even states that nearly every visual
dream is shaped by the retina's own light-figures. In our case the
fantastic rendering of these pictures was favoured by the situation. We
must not underrate the influence of the over-excited expectation which
allowed the dull retina-light to appear with increased intensity.[48]
The further formation of the retinal appearances follows in accordance
with the predominating presentations. That hallucinations appear in this
way has been also observed in other visionaries. Jeanne d'Arc[49] first
saw a cloud of light, and only after some time there stepped forth St.
Michael, St. Catherine and St. Margaret. For a whole hour Swedenborg[50]
saw nothing but illuminated spheres and fiery flames. He felt a mighty
change in the brain, which seemed to him "release of light." After
the space of one hour he suddenly saw red figures which he regarded
as angels and spirits. The sun visions of Benvenuto Cellini[51] in
Engelsburg are probably of the same nature. A student who frequently saw
apparitions stated: "When these apparitions come, at first I only see
single masses of light and at the same time am conscious of a dull noise
in the ears. Gradually these contours become clear figures."

The appearance of hallucinations occurred in a quite classical way
in Flournoy's Helen Smith. I quote the cases in question from his
article.[52]

"18 Mars. Tentative d'expérience dans l'obscurité. Mlle. Smith voit un
ballon tantôt luminieux, tantôt s'obscurcissant.

"25 Mars. Mlle. Smith commence à distinguer de vagues lueurs, de
longs rubans blancs, s'agitant du plancher au plafond, puis enfin une
magnifique étoile qui dans l'obscurité s'est montrée à elle seule
pendant toute la séance.

"1 Avril. Mlle. Smith se sent très agitée, elle a des frissons, est
partiellement glacée. Elle est très inquiète et voit tout à coup se
balançant au-dessus de la table une figure grimaçante et très laide avec
de longs cheveux rouges. Elle voit alors un magnifique bouquet de roses
de nuances diverses; tout à coup elle voit sortir de dessous le bouquet
un petit serpent, qui, rampant doucement, vient sentir les fleurs, les
regarde," etc.

Helen Smith[53] says in regard to the origin of her vision of March:

"La lueur rouge persista autour de moi et je me suis trouvée entourée de
fleurs extraordinaires."

At all times the complex hallucinations of visionaries have occupied
a peculiar place in scientific criticism. Macario[54] early separated
these so-called intuition-hallucinations from others, since he maintains
that they occur in persons of an eager mind, deep understanding and high
nervous excitability. Hecker[55] expresses himself similarly but more
enthusiastically.

His view is that their condition is "the congenital high development
of the spiritual organ which calls into active, free and mobile play
the life of the imagination, bringing it spontaneous activity." These
hallucinations are "precursors or signs of mighty spiritual power." The
vision is "an increased excitation which is harmoniously adapted to
the most complete health of mind and body." The complex hallucinations
do not belong to the waking state, but prefer as a rule a partial
waking state. The visionary is buried in his vision even to complete
annihilation. Flournoy was also always able to prove in the visions
of H.S. "un certain degré d'obnubilation." In our case the vision is
complicated by a state of sleep whose peculiarities we shall review
later.


THE CHANGE IN CHARACTER.

The most striking characteristic of the second stage in our case is the
change in character. We meet many cases in the literature which have
offered the symptom of spontaneous character-change. The first case in a
scientific publication is Weir-Mitchell's[56] case of Mary Reynolds.

This was the case of a young woman living in Pennsylvania in 1811.
After a deep sleep of about twenty hours she had totally forgotten her
entire past and everything she had learnt; even the words she spoke
had lost their meaning. She no longer knew her relatives. Slowly she
re-learnt to read and write, but her writing was from right to left.
More striking still was the change in her character. Instead of being
melancholy, she was now cheerful in the extreme. Instead of being
reserved, she was buoyant and sociable. Formerly taciturn and retiring,
she was now merry and jocose. Her disposition was totally changed.[57]

In this state she renounced her former retired life and liked to
undertake adventurous excursions unarmed, through wood and mountain, on
foot and horseback. In one of these excursions she encountered a large
black bear, which she took for a pig. The bear raised himself on his
hind legs and gnashed his teeth at her. As she could not drive her horse
on any further, she took an ordinary stick and hit the bear until it
took to flight. Five weeks later, after a deep sleep, she returned to
her earlier state with amnesia for the interval. These states alternated
for about sixteen years. _But her last twenty-five years Mary Reynolds
passed exclusively in her second state._

Schroeder von der Kalk[58] reports on the following case: The patient
became ill at the age of sixteen with periodic amnesia, after a previous
tedious illness of three years. Sometimes in the morning after waking
she passed through a peculiar choreic state, during which she made
rhythmical movements with her arms. Throughout the whole day she would
then exhibit a childish, silly behaviour and lost all her educated
capabilities. (When normal she is very intelligent, well-read, speaks
French well.) In the second state she begins to speak faulty French.
On the second day she is again at times normal. The two states are
completely separated by amnesia.[59]

Hoefelt[60] reports on a case of spontaneous somnambulism in a girl who,
in her normal state, was submissive and modest, but in somnambulism was
impertinent, rude and violent. Azam's[61] Felida was, in her normal
state, depressed, inhibited, timid; and in the second state lively,
confident, enterprising to recklessness. _The second state gradually
became the chief one, and finally so far suppressed the first state
that the patient called her normal states, lasting now but a short
time, "crises."_ The amnesic attacks had begun at 14 1/2. In time the
second state became milder and there was a certain approximation between
the character of the two states. A very striking example of change in
character is that worked out by Camuset, Ribot, Legrand du Saulle,
Richer, Voisin, and put together by Bourru and Burot.[62] It is that of
Louis V., a severe male hysteric with amnesic alternating character.
In the first stage he is rude, cheeky, querulous, greedy, thievish,
inconsiderate. In the second state he is an agreeable, sympathetic
character, industrious, docile and obedient. This amnesic change of
character has been used by Paul Lindau[63] in his drama "Der Andere"
(The Other One).

Rieger[64] reports on a case parallel to Lindau's criminal lawyer. The
unconscious personalities of Janet's Lucie and Léonie (Janet, _l.c._)
and Morton Prince's[65] may also be regarded as parallel with our case.
There are, however, therapeutic artificial products whose importance
lies in the domain of the dissociation of consciousness and of memory.

In the above cases, the second state is always separated from the first
by an amnesic dissociation, and the change in character is, at times,
accompanied by a break in the continuity of consciousness. In our case
there is no amnesic disturbance; the passage from the first to the
second stage follows quite gradually and the continuity of consciousness
remains. The patient carries out in her waking state everything,
otherwise unknown to her, from the field of the unconscious that she has
experienced during hallucinations in the second stage.

Periodic changes in personality without amnesic dissociation are found
in the region of _folie circulaire_, but are rarely seen in hysterics,
as Renaudin's[66] case shows. A young man, whose behaviour had always
been excellent, suddenly began to display the worst tendencies. There
were no symptoms of insanity, but, on the other hand, the whole surface
of the body was anæsthetic. This state showed periodic intervals, and
in the same way the patient's character was subject to vacillations. As
soon as the anæsthesia disappeared he was manageable and friendly. When
the anæsthesia returned he was overcome by the worst instincts, which,
it was observed, even included the wish to murder.

Remembering that our patient's age at the beginning of the disturbances
was 14 1/2, that is, the age of puberty had just been reached, one
must suppose that there was some connection between the disturbances
and the physiological character-changes at puberty. "There appears
in the consciousness of the individual during this period of life a
new group of sensations, together with the feelings and ideas arising
therefrom; this continuous pressure of unaccustomed mental states makes
itself constantly felt because the cause is always at work; the states
are co-ordinated because they arise from one and the same source, and
must little by little bring about deep-seated changes in the ego."[67]
Vacillating moods are easily recognisable; the confused new, strong
feelings, the inclination towards idealism, to exalted religiosity
and mysticism, side by side with the falling back into childishness,
all this gives to adolescence its prevailing character. At this epoch
the human being first makes clumsy attempts at independence in every
direction; for the first time uses for his own purposes all that family
and school have contributed hitherto; he conceives ideals, constructs
far-reaching plans for the future, lives in dreams whose content is
ambitious and egotistic. This is all physiological. The puberty of
a psychopathic is a crisis of more serious import. Not only do the
psychophysical changes run a stormy course, but features of a hereditary
degenerate character become fixed. In the child these do not appear at
all, or but sporadically. For the explanation of our case we are bound
to consider a specific disturbance of puberty. The reasons for this
view will appear from a further study of the second personality. (For
the sake of brevity we shall call the second personality IVENES--as the
patient baptised her higher ego).

Ivenes is the exact continuation of the everyday ego. She includes
the whole of her conscious content. In the semi-somnambulic state her
intercourse with the real external world is analogous to that of the
waking state, that is, she is influenced by recurrent hallucinations,
but no more than persons who are subject to non-confusional psychotic
hallucinations. The continuity of Ivenes obviously extends to the
hysterical attack with its dramatic scenes, visionary events, etc.
During the attack itself she is generally isolated from the external
world; she does not notice what is going on around her, does not
know that she is talking loudly, etc. But she has no amnesia for the
dream-content of her attack. Amnesia for her motor expressions and for
the changes in her surroundings is not always present. That this is
dependent upon the degree of intensity of her somnambulic state and
that there is sometimes partial paralysis of individual sense organs is
proved by the occasion when she did not notice me; her eyes were then
open, and most probably she saw the others, although she only perceived
me when I spoke to her. This is a case of so-called _systematised
anæsthesia_ (negative hallucination) which is often observed in
hysterics.

Flournoy,[68] for instance, reports of Helen Smith that during the
séances she suddenly ceased to see those taking part, although she still
heard their voices and felt their touch; sometimes she no longer heard,
although she saw the movements of the lips of the speakers, etc.

Ivenes is just the continuation of the waking self. She contains
the entire consciousness of S. W.'s waking state. Her remarkable
behaviour tells decidedly against any analogy with cases of _double
consciousness_. The characteristics of Ivenes contrast favourably with
the patient's ordinary self. She is a calmer, more composed personality;
her pleasing modesty and accuracy, her uniform intelligence, her
confident way of talking must be regarded as an improvement of the whole
being; thus far there is analogy with Janet's Léonie. But this is the
extent of the similarity. Apart from the amnesia, they are divided by
a deep psychological difference. Léonie II. is the healthier, the more
normal; she has regained her natural capabilities, she shows remarkable
improvement upon her chronic condition of hysteria. Ivenes rather gives
the impression of a more artificial product; there is something thought
out; despite all her excellences she gives the impression of playing
a part excellently; her world-sorrow, her yearning for the other side
of things, are not merely piety but the attributes of saintliness.
Ivenes is no mere human, but a mystic being who only partly belongs to
reality. The mournful features, the attachment to sorrow, her mysterious
fate, lead us to the historic prototype of Ivenes--Justinus Kerner's
"Prophetess of Prevorst." Kerner's book must be taken as known, and
therefore I omit any references to these common traits. But Ivenes is
no copy of the prophetess; she lacks the resignation and the saintly
piety of the latter. The prophetess is merely used by her as a study
for her own original conception. The patient pours her own soul into
the _rôle_ of the prophetess, thus seeking to create an ideal of virtue
and perfection. She anticipates her future. She incarnates in Ivenes
what she wishes to be in twenty years--the assured, influential, wise,
gracious, pious lady. It is in the construction of the second person
that there lies the far-reaching difference between Léonie II. and
Ivenes. Both are psychogenic. But Léonie I. receives in Léonie II. what
really belongs to her, while S. W. builds up a person beyond herself.
It cannot be said "she deceives herself" into, but that "she dreams
herself" into the higher ideal state.[69]

The realisation of this dream recalls vividly the psychology of the
pathological cheat. Delbruck[70] and Forel[71] have indicated the
importance of auto-suggestion in the formation of pathological cheating
and reverie. Pick[72] regards intense auto-suggestibility as the first
symptom of the hysterical dreamer, making possible the realisation of
the "day-dream." One of Pick's patients dreamt that she was in a morally
dangerous situation, and finally carried out an attempt at rape on
herself; she lay on the floor naked and fastened herself to a table and
chairs. Or some dramatic person will be created with whom the patient
enters into correspondence by letter, as in Bohn's case.[73] The patient
dreamt herself into an engagement with a totally imaginary lawyer in
Nice, from whom she received letters which she had herself written in
disguised handwriting. This pathological dreaming, with auto-suggestive
deceptions of memory amounting to real delusions and hallucinations, is
pre-eminently to be found in the lives of many saints.[74]

It is only a step from the dreamlike images strongly stamped by the
senses to the true complex hallucinations.[75] In Pick's case, for
instance, one sees that the patient, who persuades herself that she is
the Empress Elizabeth, gradually loses herself in her dreams to such an
extent that her condition must be regarded as a true "twilight" state.
Later it passes over into hysterical delirium, when her dream-phantasies
become typical hallucinations. The pathological liar, who becomes
involved through his phantasies, behaves exactly like a child who
loses himself in his play, or like the actor who loses himself in his
part.[76] There is here no fundamental distinction from somnambulic
dissociation of personality, but only a difference of degree, which
rests upon the intensity of the primary auto-suggestibility or
disintegration of the psychic elements. _The more consciousness becomes
dissociated, the greater becomes the plasticity of the dream situation,
the less becomes the amount of conscious lying and of consciousness in
general._ This being carried away by interest in the object is what
Freud calls _hysterical identification_. For instance, to Erler's[77]
acutely hysterical patient there appeared hypnagogically little riders
made of paper, who so took possession of her imagination that she had
the feeling of being herself one of them. Similar phenomena normally
occur to us in dreams in general, in which we think like "hysterics."[78]

The complete abandonment to the interesting image explains also the
wonderful naturalness of pseudological or somnambulic representation--a
degree unattainable in conscious acting. The less waking consciousness
intervenes by reflection and reasoning, the more certain and convincing
becomes the objectivation of the dream, e.g. the roof-climbing of
somnambulists.

Our case has another analogy with _pseudologia phantastica_: _The
development of the phantasies during the attacks._ Many cases are known
in the literature where the pathological lying comes on in attacks and
during serious hysterical trouble.[79]

Our patient develops her systems exclusively in the attack. In her normal
state she is quite incapable of giving any new ideas or explanations;
she must either transpose herself into somnambulism or await its
spontaneous appearance. This exhausts the affinity to _pseudologia
phantastica_ and to pathological dream-states.

Our patient's state is even differentiated from pathological dreaming,
since it could never be proved that her dream-weavings had at any
time previously been the objects of her interest during the day. Her
dreams occur explosively, break forth with bewildering completeness
from the darkness of the unconscious. Exactly the same was the case
in Flournoy's Helen Smith. In many cases (see below), however, links
with the perceptions of the normal states can be demonstrated: it seems
therefore probable that the roots of every dream were originally images
with an emotional accentuation, which, however, only occupied waking
consciousness for a short time.[80] We must allow that in the origin
of such dreams hysterical forgetfulness[81] plays a _part not to be
underestimated_.

Many images are buried which would be sufficient to put the
consciousness on guard; associated classes of ideas are lost and
go on spinning their web in the unconscious, thanks to the psychic
dissociation; this is a process which we meet again in the genesis of
our dreams.

"Our conscious reflection teaches us that when exercising attention we
pursue a definite course. But if that course leads us to an idea which
does not meet with our approval, we discontinue and cease to apply
our attention. Now, apparently, the chain of thought thus started and
abandoned, may go on without regaining attention unless it reaches a
spot of especially marked intensity, which compels renewed attention.
An initial rejection, perhaps consciously brought about by the judgment
on the ground of incorrectness or unfitness for the actual purpose of
the mental act, may therefore account for the fact that a mental process
continues unnoticed by consciousness until the onset of sleep."[82]

In this way we may explain the apparently sudden and direct appearance
of dream-states. The entire carrying over of the conscious personality
into the dream-_rôle_ involves indirectly the development of
simultaneous automatisms. "Une seconde condition peut amener la division
de conscience; ce n'est pas une altération de la sensibilité, c'est
une attitude particulière de l'esprit, la concentration de l'attention
pour un point unique; il résulte de cet état de concentration que
l'esprit devient distrait pour la reste et en quelque sorte insensible,
ce qui ouvre la carrière aux actions automatiques, et ces actions
peuvent prendre un caractère psychique et constituer des intelligences
parasites, vivant côte à côte avec la personnalité normale qui ne les
connaît pas."[83]

Our subject's romances throw a most significant light on the subjective
roots of her dreams. They swarm with secret and open love-affairs,
with illegitimate births and other sexual insinuations. The central
point of all these ambiguous stories is a lady whom she dislikes, who
is gradually made to assume the form of her polar opposite, and whilst
Ivenes becomes the pinnacle of virtue, this lady is a sink of iniquity.
_But her reincarnation doctrines, in which she appears as the mother
of countless thousands, arises in its naïve nakedness from an exuberant
phantasy which is, of course, very characteristic of the period of
puberty. It is the woman's premonition of the sexual feeling, the dream
of fruitfulness, which the patient has turned into these monstrous
ideas._ We shall not go wrong if we seek for the curious form of the
disease in the teeming sexuality of this too-rich soil. Viewed from this
standpoint, the whole creation of Ivenes, with her enormous family, is
nothing but a dream of sexual wish-fulfilment, differentiated from the
dream of a night only in that it persists for months and years.


RELATION TO THE HYSTERICAL ATTACK.

So far one point in S. W.'s history has remained unexplained, and
that is her attack. In the second séance she was suddenly seized with
a sort of fainting fit, from which she awoke with a recollection of
various hallucinations. According to her own statement, she had not lost
consciousness for a moment. Judging from the external symptoms and the
course of the attack, one is inclined to regard it as a _narcolepsy_,
or rather a _lethargy_; such, for example, as Loewenfeld has described,
and the more readily as we know that previously one member of her family
(her grandmother) has had an attack of lethargy. It is possible to
imagine that the _lethargic disposition_ (Loewenfeld) had descended to
our subject. In spiritualistic séances it is not usual to see hysterical
convulsions. Our subject showed no sort of convulsive symptoms, but in
their place, perhaps, the peculiar sleeping-states. Ætiologically, at
the outset, two moments must be taken into consideration:

1. The irruption of hypnosis.

2. The psychic stimulation.

1. _Irruption of Partial Hypnosis._--Janet observes that the
subconscious automatisms have a hypnotic influence and can bring about
complete somnambulism.[84]

He made the following experiment: While the patient, who was in the
completely waking state, was engaged in conversation by a second
observer, Janet stationed himself behind her and by means of whispered
suggestions made her unconsciously move her hand and by written signs
give an answer to questions. Suddenly the patient broke off the
conversation, turned round and with her supraliminal consciousness
continued the previously subconscious talk with Janet. She had fallen
into hypnotic somnambulism.[85]

There is here a state of affairs similar to our patient's. But it must
be noted that, for certain reasons discussed later, the sleeping state
is not to be regarded as hypnotic. We therefore come to the question of--

2. _The Psychic Stimulation._--It is told of Bettina Brentano that the
first time she met Goethe she suddenly fell asleep on his knee.[86]

This ecstatic sleep in the midst of extremest torture, the so-called
"witch-sleep," is well known in the history of trials for witchcraft.[87]

With susceptible subjects relatively insignificant stimuli suffice to
bring about the somnambulic state. Thus a sensitive lady had to have
a splinter cut out of her finger. Without any kind of bodily change
she suddenly saw herself sitting by the side of a brook in a beautiful
meadow, plucking flowers. This condition lasted as long as the slight
operation and then disappeared spontaneously.[88]

Loewenfeld[89] has noticed unintentional inducement of hysterical
lethargy through hypnosis.

Our case has certain resemblances to hysterical lethargy[90] as
described by Loewenfeld, viz. the shallow breathing, the diminution of
the pulse, the corpse-like pallor of the face, and further the peculiar
feeling of dying and the thoughts of death.[91]

The retention of one sense is not inconsistent with lethargy: thus in
certain cases of trance the sense of hearing remains.[92]

In Bonamaison's[93] case not only was the sense of touch retained,
but the senses of hearing and smell were quickened. The hallucinatory
content and loud speaking is also met with in persons with
hallucinations in lethargy.[94] Usually there prevails total amnesia
for the lethargic interval. Loewenfeld's[95] case D. had, however,
a fleeting recollection; in Bonamaison's case there was no amnesia.
Lethargic patients do not prove susceptible to the usual waking stimuli,
but Loewenfeld succeeded with his patient St. in turning the lethargy
into hypnosis by means of mesmeric passes, thus combining it with the
rest of consciousness during the attack.[96] Our patient showed herself
absolutely insusceptible in the beginning of the lethargy, but later on
she began to speak spontaneously, was incapable of giving any attention
when her somnambulic ego was speaking, but could attend when it was
one of her automatic personalities. In this last case it is probable
that the hypnotic effect of the automatisms succeeded in achieving a
partial transformation of the lethargy into hypnosis. When we consider
that, according to Loewenfeld's view, the lethargic disposition must not
be "too readily identified with the peculiar condition of the nervous
apparatus in hysteria," then the idea of the family heredity of this
disposition in our case becomes not a little probable. The disease is
much complicated by these attacks.

So far we have seen that the patient's consciousness of her ego is
identical in all the states. We have discussed two secondary complexes
of consciousness and have followed them into the somnambulic attack,
where they appear as the patient's vision when she had lost her motor
activity during the attack. During the next attacks she was impervious
to any external incidents, but on the other hand developed, within
the twilight state, all the more intense activity, in the form of
visions. It seems that many secondary series of ideas must have split
off quite early from the primary unconscious personality, for already,
after the first two séances, "spirits" appeared by the dozen. The
names were inexhaustible in variety, but the differences between the
personalities were soon exhausted and it became apparent that they could
all be subsumed under two types, the _serio-religious_ type and the
_gay-hilarious_. So far it was really only a matter of _two different
unconscious personalities_, which appeared under different names but
had no essential differences. The older type, the grandfather, who
had initiated the automatisms, also first began to make use of the
twilight state. I am not able to remember any suggestion which might
have given rise to the automatic speaking. According to the preceding
view, the attack in such circumstances might be regarded as a partial
auto-hypnosis. The ego-consciousness which remains and, as a result of
its isolation from the external world, occupies itself entirely with
its hallucinations, is what is left over of the waking consciousness.
Thus the automatism has a wide field for its activity. The independence
of the individual central spheres which we have proved at the beginning
to be present in the patient, makes the automatic act of speaking
appear intelligible. Just as the dreamer on occasion speaks in his
sleep, so, too, a man in his waking hours may accompany intensive
thought with an unconscious whisper.[97] The peculiar movements of the
speech-musculature are to be noted. They have also been observed in
other somnambulists.[98]

These clumsy attempts must be directly paralleled with the unintelligent
and clumsy movements of the table or glass, and most probably correspond
to the _preliminary activity_ of the motor portion of the presentation;
that is to say, a stimulus limited to the motor-centre which has not
previously been subordinated to any higher system. Whether the like
occurs in persons who talk in their dreams, I do not know. But it has
been observed in hypnotised persons.[99]

Since the convenient medium of speech was used as the means of
communication, the study of the subconscious personalities was
considerably lightened. Their intellectual compass is a relatively
mediocre one. Their knowledge is greater than that of the waking
patient, including also a few occasional details, such as the birthdays
of dead strangers and the like. The source of these is more or less
obscure, since the patient does not know whence in the ordinary way
she could have procured the knowledge of these facts. These are cases
of so-called cryptomnesia, which are too unimportant to deserve more
extended notice. The intelligence of the two subconscious persons is
very slight; they produce banalities almost exclusively, but their
relation to the conscious ego of the patient when in the somnambulic
state is interesting. They are invariably aware of everything that takes
place during ecstasy and occasionally they render an exact report from
minute to minute.[100]

The subconscious persons only know the patient's phantastic changes of
thought very superficially; they do not understand these and cannot
answer a single question concerning the situation. Their stereotyped
reference to Ivenes is: "Ask Ivenes." This observation reveals a dualism
in the character of the subconscious personalities difficult to explain;
for the grandfather, who gives information by automatic speech, also
appears to Ivenes and, according to her account, teaches her about the
objects in question. How is it that, when the grandfather speaks through
the patient's mouth, he knows nothing of the very things which he
himself teaches her in the ecstasies?

We must again return to the discussion of the first appearance of the
hallucinations. We picture the vision, then, as an irruption of hypnosis
into the visual sphere. That irruption does not lead to a "normal"
hypnosis, but to a "hystero-hypnosis," that is, the simple hypnosis is
complicated by a hysterical attack.

It is not a rare occurrence in the domain of hypnotism for normal
hypnosis to be disturbed, or rather to be replaced by the unexpected
appearance of hysterical somnambulism; the hypnotist in many cases then
loses rapport with the patient. In our case the automatism arising in
the motor area plays the part of hypnotist; the suggestions proceeding
from it (called objective auto-suggestions) hypnotise the neighbouring
areas in which a certain susceptibility has arisen. At the moment
when the hypnotism flows over into the visual sphere, the hysterical
attack occurs which, as remarked, effects a very deep-reaching change
in a large portion of the psychical region. We must now suppose that
the automatism stands in the same relationship to the attack as the
hypnotist to a pathological hypnosis; its influence upon the further
structure of the situation is lost. The hallucinatory appearance of the
hypnotised personality, or rather of the suggested idea, may be regarded
as the last effect upon the somnambulic personality. Thenceforward the
hypnotist becomes only a figure with whom the somnambulic personality
occupies itself independently: he can only state what is going on and is
no longer the _conditio sine qua non_ of the content of the somnambulic
attack. The independent ego-complex of the attack, in our case Ivenes,
has now the upper hand. She groups her own mental products around
the personality of the hypnotiser, that is, of the grandfather, now
degraded to a mere image. In this way we are enabled to understand the
dualism in the character of the grandfather. _The grandfather I. who
speaks directly to those present, is a totally different person and a
mere spectator of his double, grandfather II., who appears as Ivenes'
teacher._ Grandfather I. maintains energetically that both are one and
the same person, and that I. has all the knowledge which II. possesses,
and is only prevented from giving information by the difficulties of
speech. (The dissociation was of course not realized by the patient,
who took both to be one person.) Grandfather I., if closely examined,
however, is not altogether wrong, judging from one fact which seems
to make for the identity of I. and II., viz. that they are never both
present together. When I. speaks automatically, II. is not present;
Ivenes remarks on his absence. Similarly, during the ecstasy, when
she is with II., she cannot say where I. is, or she may learn only on
returning from an imaginary journey that meanwhile I. has been guarding
her body. Conversely I. never says that he is going on a journey with
Ivenes and never explains anything to her. This behaviour should be
noted, for if I. is really separate from II., there seems no reason why
he should not speak automatically at the same time that II. appears,
and be present with II. in the ecstasy. Although this might have been
supposed possible, as a matter of fact it was never observed. How is
this dilemma to be resolved? At all events there exists an identity
of I. and II., but it does not lie in the region of the personality
under discussion; it lies in the basis common to both; that is, in
the personality of the subject which in deepest essence is one and
indivisible. Here we come across the characteristic of all hysterical
dissociations of consciousness. _They are disturbances which only
belong to the superficial, and none reaches so deep as to attack the
strong-knit foundation of the ego-complex._

In many such cases we can find the bridge which, although often
well-concealed, spans the apparently impassable abyss. For instance, by
suggestion, one of four cards is made invisible to a hypnotised person;
he thereupon names the other three. A pencil is placed in his hand with
the instruction to write down all the cards lying there; he correctly
adds the fourth one.[101]

In the aura of his hystero-epileptic attacks a patient of Janet's[102]
invariably had a vision of a conflagration, and whenever he saw an
open fire he had an attack; indeed, the sight of a lighted match was
sufficient to bring about an attack. The patient's visual field on the
left side was limited to 30°, the right eye was shut. The left eye was
fixed in the middle of a perimeter whilst a lighted match was held at
80°. The hystero-epileptic attack took place immediately. Despite the
extensive amnesia in many cases of double consciousness, the patients'
behaviour does not correspond to the degree of their ignorance, but it
seems rather as if a deeper instinct guided their actions in accordance
with their former knowledge. Not only this relatively slight amnesic
dissociation, but the severe amnesia of the epileptic twilight-state,
formerly regarded as _irreparabile damnum_, does not suffice to cut
the inmost threads which bind the ego-complex in the twilight-state to
the normal ego. In one case the content of the twilight-state could be
grafted on to the waking ego-complex.[103]

Making use of these experiments for our case, we obtain the helpful
hypothesis that those layers of the unconscious beyond reach of the
dissociation endeavour to present the unity of automatic personality.
This endeavour is shattered in the deeper-seated and more elemental
disturbance of the hysterical attack,[104] which prevents a more
complete synthesis by the tacking on of associations which are to a
certain extent the most original individual property of supraliminal
personality. _As the Ivenes dream emerged it was fitted on to the
figures accidentally in the field of vision, and henceforth remains
associated with them._


RELATIONSHIP TO THE UNCONSCIOUS PERSONALITY.

As we have seen, the numerous personalities become grouped round two
types, the grandfather and Ulrich von Gerbenstein. The first produces
exclusively sanctimonious religiosity and gives edifying moral precepts.
The latter is, in one word, a "flapper," in whom there is nothing male
except the name. We must here add from the anamnesis that at fifteen the
patient was confirmed by a very bigoted clergyman, and at home she is
occasionally the recipient of sanctimonious moral talks. The grandfather
represents this side of her past, Gerbenstein the other half; hence the
curious contrast. Here we have personified the chief characteristics
of her past. On the one hand the sanctimonious person with a narrow
education, on the other the boisterousness of a lively girl of fifteen
who often overshoots the mark.[105] We find both sets of traits mixed
in the patient in sharp contrast. At times she is anxious, shy, and
extremely reserved; at others boisterous to a degree. She is herself
often most painfully aware of these contradictions. This circumstance
gives us the key to the source of the two unconscious personalities. The
patient is obviously seeking a middle path between the two extremes;
she endeavours to repress them and strains after some ideal condition.
These strainings bring her to the puberty dream of the ideal Ivenes,
beside whose figure the unacknowledged trends of her character recede
into the background. They are not lost, however, but as repressed
ideas, analogous to the Ivenes idea, begin an independent existence as
automatic personalities.

S. W.'s behaviour recalls vividly Freud's[106] investigations into
dreams which disclose the independent growth of repressed thoughts. We
can now comprehend why the hallucinatory persons are separated from
those who write and speak automatically. The former teach Ivenes the
secrets of the Other Side, they relate all those phantastic tales about
the extraordinariness of her personality, they create scenes where
Ivenes can appear dramatically with the attributes of power, wisdom and
virtue. These are nothing but dramatic dissociations of her dream-self.
The latter, the automatic persons, are the ones to be overcome, they
must have no part in Ivenes. With the spirit-companions of Ivenes they
have only the name in common. _A priori_, it is not to be expected that
in a case like ours, where these divisions are never clearly defined,
that two such characteristic individualities should disappear entirely
from a somnambulic ego-complex having so close a relation with the
waking consciousness. And in fact, we do meet them in part in those
ecstatic penitential scenes and in part in the romances crammed with
more or less banal, mischievous gossip.


COURSE.

It only remains to say a few words about the course of this strange
affection. The process reached its maximum in four to eight weeks. The
descriptions given of Ivenes and of the unconscious personalities belong
generally to this period. Thenceforth a gradual decline was noticeable;
the ecstasies grew meaningless and the influence of Gerbenstein became
more powerful. The phenomena gradually lost their distinctive features,
the characters which were at first well demarcated became by degrees
inextricably mixed. The psychological contribution grew smaller and
smaller until finally the whole story assumed a marked effect of
fabrication. Ivenes herself was much concerned about this decline; she
became painfully uncertain, spoke cautiously, feeling her way, and
allowed her character to appear undisguised. The somnambulic attacks
decreased in frequency and intensity. All degrees from somnambulism to
conscious lying were observable. Thus the curtain fell. The patient has
since gone abroad. We should not underestimate the importance of the
fact that her character has become pleasanter and more stable. Here we
may recall the cases cited in which the second state gradually replaced
the first state. Perhaps this is a similar phenomenon.

It is well known that somnambulic manifestations sometimes begin at
puberty.[107] The attacks of somnambulism in Dyce's case[108] began
immediately before puberty and lasted just till its termination. The
somnambulism of H. Smith is likewise closely connected with puberty.[109]

Schroeder von der Kalk's patient was 16 years old at the time of her
illness; Felida 14 1/2, etc. We know also that at this period the
future character is formed and fixed. In the case of Felida and of
Mary Reynolds we saw that the character in state II. replaced that
of state I. _It is not therefore unthinkable that these phenomena of
double consciousness are nothing but character-formations for the
future personality, or their attempts to burst forth._ In consequence
of special difficulties (unfavourable external conditions, psychopathic
disposition of the nervous system, etc.), _these new formations,
or attempts thereat, become bound up with peculiar disturbances
of consciousness_. Occasionally the somnambulism, in view of the
difficulties that oppose the future character, takes on a marked
teleological meaning, for it gives the individual, who might otherwise
be defeated, the means of victory. Here I am thinking first of all
of Jeanne d'Arc, whose extraordinary courage recalls the deeds of
Mary Reynolds' II. This is perhaps the place to point out the similar
function of the "hallucination téléologique" of which the public reads
occasionally, although it has not yet been submitted to a scientific
study.


THE UNCONSCIOUS ADDITIONAL CREATIVE WORK.

We have now discussed all the essential manifestations offered by
our case which are of significance for its inner structure. Certain
accompanying manifestations may be briefly considered: _the unconscious
additional creative work_. Here we shall encounter a not altogether
unjustifiable scepticism on the part of the representative of science.
Dessoir's conception of a second ego met with much opposition, and was
rejected, as too impossible in many directions. As is known, occultism
has proclaimed a pre-eminent right to this field and has drawn premature
conclusions from doubtful observations. We are indeed very far from
being in a position to state anything conclusive, since we have at
present only most inadequate material. Therefore if we touch on the
field of the unconscious additional creative work, it is only that we
may do justice to all sides of our case. _By unconscious addition we
understand that automatic process whose result does not penetrate to
the conscious psychic activity of the individual._ To this region above
all belongs thought-reading through table movements. I do not know
whether there are people who can divine a whole long train of thought
by means of inductions from the intentional tremulous movements. It is,
however, certain that, assuming this to be possible, such persons must
be availing themselves of a routine achieved after endless practice. But
in our case long practice can be excluded without more ado, and there is
nothing left but to accept a primary susceptibility of the unconscious,
far exceeding that of the conscious.

This supposition is supported by numerous observations on somnambulists.
I will mention only Binet's[110] experiments, where little letters
or some such thing, or little complicated figures in relief were
laid on the anæsthetic skin of the back of the hand or the neck, and
the unconscious perceptions were then recorded by means of signs. On
the basis of these experiments he came to the following conclusion:
"D'après les calculs que j'ai pu faire, la sensibilité inconsciente
d'une hystérique est à certains moments _cinquante fois_ plus fine que
celle d'une personne normale." A second additional creation coming under
consideration in our case and in numerous other somnambulists, is that
condition which French investigators call "cryptomnesia."[111] By this
term is meant the becoming conscious of a memory-picture which cannot
be regarded as in itself primary, but at most is secondary, by means
of subsequent recalling or abstract reasoning. It is characteristic of
cryptomnesia that the picture which emerges does not bear the obvious
mark of the memory-picture, is not, that is to say, bound up with the
idiosyncratic super-conscious ego-complex.

Three ways may be distinguished in which the cryptomnesic picture is
brought to consciousness.

1. _The picture enters consciousness without any intervention of the
sense-spheres (intra-psychically)._ It is an inrushing idea whose
causal sequence is hidden within the individual. In so far cryptomnesia
is quite an everyday occurrence, concerned with the deepest normal
psychic events. How often it misleads the investigator, the author
or the composer into believing his ideas original, whilst the critic
quite well recognises their source! Generally the individuality of the
representation protects the author from the accusation of plagiarism
and proves his good faith; still, cases do occur of unconscious verbal
reproduction. Should the passage in question contain some remarkable
idea, the accusation of plagiarism, more or less conscious, is
justified. After all, a valuable idea is linked by numerous associations
with the ego-complex; at different times, in different situations, it
has already been meditated upon and thus leads by innumerable links in
all directions. It can therefore never so disappear from consciousness
that its continuity could be entirely lost from the sphere of conscious
memory. We have, however, a criterion by which we can always recognise
objectively intra-psychic cryptomnesia. The cryptomnesic presentation
is linked to the ego-complex by the minimum of associations. The reason
for this lies in the relation of the individual to the particular
object, in the disproportion of interest to object. Two possibilities
occur: (1) The object is worthy of interest but the interest is slight
in consequence of dispersion or want of understanding; (2) The object
is not worthy of interest, consequently the interest is slight. In
both cases an extremely labile connection with consciousness arises
which leads to a rapid forgetting. The slight bridge is soon destroyed
and the acquired presentation sinks into the unconscious, where it is
no longer accessible to consciousness. Should it enter consciousness
by means of cryptomnesia, the feeling of strangeness, of its being an
original creation, will cling to it because the path by which it entered
the subconscious has become undiscoverable. Strangeness and original
creation are, moreover, closely allied to one another if one recalls
the numerous witnesses in _belles-lettres_ to the nature of genius
("possession" by genius).[112]

Apart from certain striking cases of this kind, where it is doubtful
whether it is a cryptomnesia or an original creation, there are some
cases in which a passage of no essential content is reproduced, and that
almost verbally, as in the following example:--

About that time when Zarathustra lived on the blissful islands, it came
to pass that a ship cast anchor at that island on which the smoking
mountain standeth; and the sailors of that ship went ashore in order to
shoot rabbits! But about the hour of noon, when the captain and his men
had mustered again, they suddenly saw a man come through the air unto
them, and a voice said distinctly: "It is time! It is high time!" But
when that person was nighest unto them (he passed by them flying quickly
like a shadow, in the direction in which the volcano was situated) they
recognised with the greatest confusion that it was Zarathustra. For all
of them, except the captain, had seen him before, and they loved him, as
the folk love, blending love and awe in equal parts. "Lo! there," said
the old steersman, "Zarathustra goeth unto hell!"

       *       *       *       *       *

An extract of awe-inspiring import from the log of the ship "Sphinx" in
the year 1686, in the Mediterranean.

Just. Kerner, "Blätter aus Prevorst," vol. IV., p, 57.

The four captains and a merchant, Mr. Bell, went ashore on the island of
Mount Stromboli to shoot rabbits. At three o'clock they called the crew
together to go aboard, when, to their inexpressible astonishment, they
saw two men flying rapidly over them through the air. One was dressed
in black, the other in grey. They approached them very closely, in the
greatest haste; to their greatest dismay they descended amid the burning
flames into the crater of the terrible volcano, Mount Stromboli. They
recognised the pair as acquaintances from London.

Frau E. Förster-Nietzsche, the poet's sister, told me, in reply to my
inquiry, that Nietzsche took up Just. Kerner between the age of twelve
and fifteen, when stopping with his grandfather, Pastor Oehler, in
Pobler, but certainly never afterwards. It could never have been the
poet's intention to commit a plagiarism from a ship's log; if this had
been the case, he would certainly have omitted the very prosaic "to
shoot rabbits," which was, moreover, quite unessential to the situation.
In the poetical sketch of Zarathustra's journey into Hell there was
obviously interpolated, half or wholly unconsciously, that forgotten
impression from his youth.

This is an instance which shows all the peculiarities of cryptomnesia.
A quite unessential detail, which deserves nothing but speedy
forgetting, is reproduced with almost verbal fidelity, whilst the
chief part of the narrative is, one cannot say altered, but recreated
quite distinctively. To the distinctive core, the idea of the journey
to Hell, there is added a detail, the old, forgotten impression of
a similar situation. The original is so absurd that the youth, who
read everything, probably skipped through it, and certainly had no
deep interest in it. Here we get the required minimum of associated
links, for we cannot easily conceive a greater jump, than from that
old, absurd story to Nietzsche's consciousness in the year 1883. If we
picture to ourselves Nietzsche's mood at the time when "Zarathustra"
was composed,[113] and think of the ecstasy that at more than one
point approached the pathological, we shall comprehend the abnormal
reminiscence. The second of the two possibilities mentioned, the
acceptance of some object, not itself uninteresting, in a state of
dispersion or half interest from lack of understanding, and its
cryptomnesic reproduction we find chiefly in somnambulists; it is also
found in the literary chronicles dealing with dying celebrities.[114]

Amid the exhaustive selection of these phenomena we are chiefly
concerned with _talking in a foreign tongue, the so-called glossolalia_.
This phenomenon is mentioned everywhere when it is a question of similar
ecstatic conditions. In the New Testament, in the _Acta Sanctorum_,[115]
in the Witchcraft Trials, more recently in the Prophetess of Prevorst,
in Judge Edmond's daughter Laura, in Flournoy's Helen Smith. The last
is unique from the point of view of investigation; it is found also in
Bresler's[116] case, which is probably identical with Blumhardt's[117]
Gottlieben Dittus. As Flournoy shows, glossolalia is, so far as it
really is independent speech, a cryptomnesic phenomenon, [Greek:
Kat' exochên]. The reader should consult Flournoy's most interesting
exposition.

In our case glossolalia was only once observed, when the only
understandable words were the scattered variations on the word "vena."
The source of this word is clear. A few days previously the patient
had dipped into an anatomical atlas for the study of the veins of the
face, which were given in Latin. She had used the word "vena" in her
dreams, as happens occasionally to normal persons. The remaining words
and sentences in a foreign language betray, at the first glance, their
derivation from French, in which the patient was somewhat fluent.
Unfortunately I am without the more accurate translations of the various
sentences, because the patient would not give them; but we may hold
that it was a phenomenon similar to Helen Smith's Martian language.
Flournoy found that the Martian language was nothing but a childish
translation from French; the words were changed but the syntax remained
the same. Even more probable is the view that the patient simply ranged
next to each other meaningless words that rang strangely, without any
true word-formation;[118] she borrowed certain characteristic sounds
from French and Italian and combined them into a kind of language,
just as Helen Smith completed the _lacunæ_ in the real Sanscrit words
by products of her own resembling that language. The curious names of
the mystical system can be reduced, for the most part, to known roots.
The writer vividly recalls the botanical schemes found in every school
atlas; the internal resemblance of the relationship of the planets to
the sun is also pretty clear; we shall not be going astray if we see in
the names reminiscences from popular astronomy. Thus can be explained
the names Persus, Fenus, Nenus, Sirum, Surus, Fixus, and Pix, as
the childlike distortions of Perseus, Venus, Sirius and Fixed Star,
analogous to the Vena variations. Magnesor vividly recalls Magnetism,
whose mystic significance the patient knew from the Prophetess of
Prevorst. In Connesor, the contrary to Magnesor, the prefix "con" is
probably the French "contre." Hypnos and Hyfonismus recall hypnosis
and hypnotism (German _hypnotismus_), about which there are the most
superstitious ideas circulating in lay circles. The most used suffixes
in "us" and "os" are the signs by which as a rule people decide the
difference between Latin and Greek. The other names probably spring
from similar accidents to which we have no clues. The rudimentary
glossolalia of our case has not any title to be a classical instance of
cryptomnesia, for it only consisted in the unconscious use of various
impressions, partly optical, party acoustic, and all very close at hand.

2. _The cryptomnesic image arrives at consciousness through the senses
(as a hallucination)._ Helen Smith is the classic example of this kind.
I refer to the case mentioned on the date "18 Mars."[119]

3. _The image arrives at consciousness by motor automatism._ H. Smith
had lost her valuable brooch, which she was anxiously looking for
everywhere. Ten days later her guide Leopold informed her by means
of the table where the brooch was. Thus informed, she found it at
night-time in the open field, covered by sand.[120] Strictly speaking,
in cryptomnesia there is not any additional creation in the true sense
of the word, since the conscious memory experiences no increase of its
function, but only an enrichment of its content. By the automatism
certain regions are merely made accessible to consciousness in an
indirect way, which were formerly sealed against it. But the unconscious
does not thereby accomplish any creation which exceeds the capacity of
consciousness qualitatively or quantitatively. Cryptomnesia is only an
apparent additional creation, in contrast to hypermnesia, which actually
represents an increase of function.[121]

We have spoken above of a receptivity of the unconscious greater
than that of the consciousness, chiefly in regard to the simple
attempts at thought-reading of numbers. As mentioned, not only our
somnambulist but a relatively large number of normal persons are able
to guess from the tremors lengthy thought-sequences, if they are not
too complicated. These experiments are, so to speak, the prototype
of those rarer and incomparably more astonishing cases of intuitive
knowledge displayed at times by somnambulists.[122] Zschokke[123] in
his "Introspection" has shown us that these phenomena do not belong
only to the domain of somnambulism, but occur among non-somnambulic
persons. The formation of such knowledge seems to be arrived at in
various ways: first and foremost there is the fineness, already noted,
of unconscious perceptions; then must be emphasised the importance of
the enormous suggestibility of somnambulists. _The somnambulist not
only incorporates every suggestive idea to some extent, but actually
lives in the suggestion, in the person of his doctor or observer,
with that abandonment characteristic of the suggestible hysteric._
The relation of Frau Hauffe to Kerner is a striking example of this.
That in such cases there is a high degree of _association-concordance_
can cause no astonishment; a condition which Richet might have taken
more account of in his experiments in thought-transference. Finally
there are cases of somnambulic additional creative work which are not
to be explained solely by hyperæsthesia of the unconscious activity
of the senses and association-concordance, but presuppose a highly
developed intellectual activity of the unconscious. The deciphering
of the purposive tremors demand an extreme sensitiveness and delicacy
of feeling, both psychological and physiological, to combine the
individual perceptions into a complete unity of thought, if it is at
all permissible to make an analogy between the processes of cognition
in the realm of the unconscious and the conscious. The possibility
must always be considered that _in the unconscious, feeling and concept
are not clearly separated_, perhaps even are one. The intellectual
elevation which certain somnambulists display in ecstasy, though a rare
thing, is none the less one that has sometimes been observed.[124] I
would designate the scheme composed by our patient as just one of those
pieces of creative work that exceed the normal intelligence. We have
already seen whence one portion of this scheme probably came. A second
source is no doubt the life-crisis of Frau Hauffe, portrayed in Kerner's
book. The external form seems to be determined by these adventitious
facts. As already observed in the presentation of the case, the idea of
dualism arises from the conversations picked up piecemeal by the patient
during those dreamy states occurring after her ecstasies. This exhausts
my knowledge of the sources of S. W.'s creations. Whence arose the
root-idea the patient is unable to say. I naturally examined occultistic
literature pertinent to the subject, and discovered a store of parallels
with her gnostic system from different centuries scattered through all
kinds of work mostly quite inaccessible to the patient. Moreover, at
her youthful age, and with her surroundings, the possibility of any
such study is quite excluded. A brief survey of the system in the light
of her own explanations shows how much intelligence was used in its
construction. How highly the intellectual work is to be estimated is a
matter of opinion. In any case, considering her youth, her mentality
must be regarded as quite extraordinary.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Thesis published in 1902. Translator, M. D. Eder, M.D.]

[Footnote 2: _Arch. f. Psych._, XXXIII. p. 928.]

[Footnote 3: Richer, "Études cliniques sur l'hystéro-épilepsie," p. 483.]

[Footnote 4: _Idem_, _l.c._, p. 487; cp. also Erler, _Allg. Zeitschrift
f. Psychiatrie_, XXXV. p. 28; also Culerre, _Allg. Zeit. f. Psych._,
XLVI., Litteraturbericht 356.]

[Footnote 5: Charcot and Guinon, "Progrès méd.," 1891.]

[Footnote 6: "Somnambulism must be conceived as systematised partial
waking, in which a limited, connected presentation-complex takes place.
Contrary presentations do not occur, at the same time the mental
activity is carried on with increased energy within the limited sphere
of the waking" (Lowenfeld, "Hypnotism," 1901, p. 289).]

[Footnote 7: Azam, "Hypnotisme--Double conscience," etc., Paris, 1887.
For similar cases, cf. Forbes Winslow, "On Obscure Diseases," p. 335.]

[Footnote 8: _Trib. méd._, March, 1890.]

[Footnote 9: _Annal. méd. psychol._, Jan., Feb., 1892.]

[Footnote 10: "Principles of Psychology," p. 391.]

[Footnote 11: Mesnet, "De l'automatisme de la mémoire et du souvenir
dans le somnambulisme pathologique." Union médicale, Juillet, 1874. Cf.
Binet, "Les Altérations de la personnalité," p. 37. Cf. also Mesnet,
"Somnambulisme spontané dans ses rapports avec l'hystérie," _Arch. de
Neurol._, Nr. 69, 1892.]

[Footnote 12: _Arch. de Neur._, Mai, 1891.]

[Footnote 13: "Philosophy of Sleep," 1830. Cf. Binet, "Les Altérations,"
etc.]

[Footnote 14: Goethe: _Zur Naturwissenschaft in Allgemeinen_. "I was
able, when I closed my eyes and bent my head, to conjure the imaginary
picture of a flower. This flower did not retain its first shape for
a single instant, but unfolded out of itself new flowers composed of
coloured petals and green leaves. They were not natural flowers, but
phantastic ones. They were as regular in shape as a sculptor's rosettes.
It was impossible to fix the creation which sprang up, nevertheless the
dream-image lasted as long as I desired it to last; it neither faded nor
grew stronger."]

[Footnote 15: C. Westphal, "Die Agoraphobie," _Arch. f. Psych._, III. p.
158.]

[Footnote 16: Pick, _Arch. f. Psych._, XV. p. 202.]

[Footnote 17: _Allgem. Zeitschr. f. Psych._, XXI. p. 78.]

[Footnote 18: "Neurasthenische Krisen," _Münch. Med. Wochenschr._, März,
1902, "When the patients first describe their crises they generally give
a picture that makes us think of epileptic depression. I have often been
deceived in this way."]

[Footnote 19: Mörchen, "Ueber Dämmerzustände," Marburg, 1901, Fall. 32,
p. 75.]

[Footnote 20: It must be noted that a frequent guest in S. W.'s home was
a gentleman who spoke high German.]

[Footnote 21: Ivenes is the mystical name of the medium's somnambulic
self.]

[Footnote 22: "The Major Symptoms of Hysteria." New York: The Macmillan
Company.]

[Footnote 23: See page 17.]

[Footnote 24: Binet, "Les altérations de la personnalité."]

[Footnote 25: Richet, _Rev. Phil._, 1884, II. p. 650.]

[Footnote 26: Binet, "Les altérations de la personnalité," p. 139.]

[Footnote 27: Complete references in Binet, "Les altérations," p. 197,
footnote.]

[Footnote 28: As is known, during the waking-state the hands and arms
are never quite still, but are constantly subjected to fine tremors.
Preyer, Lehmann, and others have proved that these movements are
influenced in a high degree by the predominant presentations. Preyer
shows that the outstretched hand drew small, more or less faithful,
copies of figures which were vividly presented. These purposeful tremors
can be demonstrated in a very simple way by experiments with the
pendulum.]

[Footnote 29: Cf. Preyer, "Die Erklärung des Gedankenlesens," Leipzig,
1886.]

[Footnote 30: Analogous to certain hypnotic experiments in the waking
state. Cf. Janet's experiment when by a whispered suggestion he
induced a patient to lie flat on the ground without being aware of it
("L'Automatisme").]

[Footnote 31: Charcot's scheme of word-picture combination: 1, Auditory
image. 2, Visual image. 3, Motor image., Speech image., Writing image.
In Gilbert Ballet, "Die innerliche Sprache," Leipzig and Wien, 1890.]

[Footnote 32: Bain says, "Thought is a suppressed word or a suppressed
act" ("The Senses and the Intellect").]

[Footnote 33: _Proceedings of S.P.R._, 1885. "Automatic writing."]

[Footnote 34: Pierre Janet, "L'Automatisme Psychologique," p. 317,
Paris, 1889.]

[Footnote 35: "Les Altérations," p. 132.]

[Footnote 36: "Une fois baptisé, le personnage inconscient est plus
déterminé et plus net, il montre mieux ses caractères psychologiques"
(Janet, "L'Automatisme," p. 318).]

[Footnote 37: Cf. the corresponding experiments of Binet and Féré. See
Binet, "Les Altérations."]

[Footnote 38: Cf. Corresponding tests by Flournoy: "Des Indes à la
planète Mara. Etude sur un cas de somnambulisme avec glossolalie." Paris
and Genève, 1900.]

[Footnote 39: Cf. Hagen, "Zur Theorie des Hallucinationen," _Allg.
Zeitschrift f. Psych._, XXV. 10.]

[Footnote 40: Binet, "Les Altérations," p. 157.]

[Footnote 41: "Die Traumdeutung," 1900. ["The Interpretation of Dreams,"
translated by Dr. A. A. Brill. London: Allen & Unwin, 1918.]]

[Footnote 42: Flournoy, _l.c._, p. 55.]

[Footnote 43: Schüle, "Handbuch," p. 134.]

[Footnote 44: J. Müller, quoted _Allg. Zeit. f. Psych._, XXV. 41.]

[Footnote 45: Spinoza hypnopompically saw a "_nigrum et scabiosum
Brasilianum_."--J. Müller, _l.c._

In Goethe's "The Elective Affinities," at times in the half darkness
Ottilie saw the figure of Edward in a dimly-lit spot. Compare also
Cardanus, "imagines videbam ab imo lecti, quasi e parvulis annulis
arcisque constantes, arborum, belluarum, hominum, oppidorum,
instructarum acierum, bellicorum et musicorum instrumentorum aliorumque
huius generis adscendentes, vicissimque descendentes, aliis atque aliis
succedentibus" (Hieronymus Cardanus, "De subtilitate rerum").]

[Footnote 46: "Le sommeil et les rêves," p. 134.]

[Footnote 47: G. Trumbull Ladd, "Contribution to the Psychology of
Visual Dreams," _Mind_, April, 1892.]

[Footnote 48: Hecker says of the same condition, "There is a
simple elemental vision, even without sense presentation, through
over-excitation of mental activity, not leading to phantastic imagery,
that is the vision of light free from form, a manifestation of the
visual organs stimulated from within" ("Ueber Visionen," Berlin, 1848).]

[Footnote 49: Jules Quicherat, "Procès de condamnation et de
réhabilitation de Jeanne d'Arc, dite La Pucelle," etc.]

[Footnote 50: Hagen, _l.c._, p. 57.]

[Footnote 51: Goethe, "Benvenuto Cellini."]

[Footnote 52: Flournoy, _l.c._, p. 32 ff.]

[Footnote 53: Flournoy, _l.c._, p. 51.]

[Footnote 54: _Allg. Zeit. f. Psych._, IV. 139.]

[Footnote 55: _Ibid._, VI. 285.]

[Footnote 56: Coll. Physicians of Philadelphia, April 4, 1888. Also
_Harper's Magazine_, 1869. Abstracted in extenso in William James's
"Principles of Psychology," 1891, p. 391 ff.]

[Footnote 57: Cf. Emminghaus, "Allg. Psychopathologie," p. 129, Ogier
Ward's case.]

[Footnote 58: Schroeder von der Kalk, "Pathologie und Therapie der
Geisteskrankheiten," p. 31: Braunschweig, 1863. Quoted in _Allg. Zeit.
f. Psych._, XXII., p. 405.]

[Footnote 59: Cf. Donath, "Ueber Suggestibilität," Wiener mediz. Presse,
1832, No. 31. Quoted _Arch. f. Psych._, XXXII., p. 335.]

[Footnote 60: Hoefelt. _Allg. Zeit. f. Psych._, XLIX., p. 200.]

[Footnote 61: Azam, "Hypnotisme, Double Conscience," etc.]

[Footnote 62: Bourru et Burot, "Changements de Personnnalité," 1888.]

[Footnote 63: Moll, "Zeit. f. Hypn.," I., 306.]

[Footnote 64: Rieger, "Der Hypnotismus," 1884, p. 190 ff.]

[Footnote 65: Morton Prince, "An Experimental Study of Visions," Brain,
1898.]

[Footnote 66: Quoted by Ribot, "Die Persönlichkeit."]

[Footnote 67: _Ibid._, p. 69.]

[Footnote 68: Flournoy, _l.c._, p. 59.]

[Footnote 69: "Les rêves somnambuliques, sortes de romans de
l'imagination subliminale, analogues à ces histoires continues, que
tant de gens se racontent à eux-mêmes et dont ils sont généralement les
héros dans leurs moments de far niente ou d'occupations routinières qui
n'offrent qu'un faible obstacle aux rêveries intérieures. Constructions
fantaisistes, millefois reprises et poursuivies, rarement achevées, où
la folle du logis se donne libre carrière et prend sa revanche du terne
et plat terre à terre des réalités quotidiennes." (Flournoy, _l.c._, p.
8).]

[Footnote 70: Delbruck, "Die Pathologische Lüge."]

[Footnote 71: Forel, "Hypnotisme."]

[Footnote 72: Pick, "Ueber Path. Träumerei und ihre Beziehung zur
Hysterie," _Jahr. f. Psych. und Neur._, XIV., p. 280.]

[Footnote 73: Bohn, "Ein Fall von doppelten Bewusstsein Diss." Breslau,
1898.]

[Footnote 74: Görres, _l.c._]

[Footnote 75: Cf. Behr, _Allg. Zeit. f. Psych._, LVI., 918, and Ballet,
_l.c._, p. 44.]

[Footnote 76: Cf. _Redlich, Allg. Zeit. f. Psych._, LVII., 66.]

[Footnote 77: Erler, _Allg. Zeit. f. Psych._, XXXV., 21.]

[Footnote 78: Binet, "Les hystériques ne sont pas pour nous que des
sujets d'élection agrandissant des phénomènes qu'on doit nécessairement
retrouver à quelque degré chez une foule d'autres personnes qui ne
sont ni atteintes ni même effleurées par la nêvrose hystérique". ("Les
altérations," p. 29)]

[Footnote 79: Delbrück, _l.c._, and Redlich, _l.c._ Cf. the development
of delusions in epileptic stupor mentioned by Mörchen, "Essay on
Stupor," pp. 51 and 59, 1901.]

[Footnote 80: Cf. Flournoy's very interesting supposition as to the
origin of the Hindu _cycle_ of H.S.: "Je ne serais pas étonné que
la remarque de Martes sur la beauté des femmes du Kanara ait été le
clou, l'atome crochu, qui a piqué l'attention subliminale et l'a très
naturellement rivée sur cette unique passage avec les deux ou trois
lignes consécutives, à l'exclusion de tout le contexte environnant
beaucoup moins intérressant" (_L.c._, p. 285).]

[Footnote 81: Janet says, "From forgetfulness there arises frequently,
even if not invariably, the so-called lying of hysteria. The same
explanation holds good of a hysteric's whims, changes of mood,
ingratitude--in a word, of his inconstancy. The link between the past
and present, which gives to the whole personality its seriousness and
poise, depends to a large extent upon memory" ("Mental States," etc., p.
67).]

[Footnote 82: Freud, "The Interpretation of Dreams," p. 469.]

[Footnote 83: Binet, _l.c._, p. 84.]

[Footnote 84: "Une autre considération rapproche encore ces deux
états, c'est que les actes subconscients ont un effet en quelque sorte
hypnotisant et contribuant par eux-mêmes à amener le somnambulisme"
("L'Automatisme," p. 329).]

[Footnote 85: Janet, _l.c._, p. 329.]

[Footnote 86: In literature Gustave Flaubert has made use of a similar
falling asleep at the moment of extreme excitement in his novel
"Salambo." When the hero, after many struggles, has at last captured
Salambo, he suddenly falls asleep just as he touches her virginal bosom.]

[Footnote 87: Perhaps the cases of paralysis of the emotions also belong
here. Cf. Baetz, _Allg. Zeitsch. f. Psych._, LVIII., p. 717.]

[Footnote 88: _Allg. Zeitsch. f. Psych._, XXX., p. 17.]

[Footnote 89: _Arch. f. Psych._, XXIII., p. 59.]

[Footnote 90: Cf. here Flournoy, _l.c._, 65.]

[Footnote 91: _Arch. f. Psych._, XXII., p. 737.]

[Footnote 92: _Ibid._, 734.]

[Footnote 93: Bonamaison, "Un cas remarquable d'Hypnose spontanée,"
etc.--_Rev. de l'Hypnotisme_, Fév. 1890, p. 234.]

[Footnote 94: _Arch. f. Psych._, XXII., 737.]

[Footnote 95: _Ibid._]

[Footnote 96: _Ibid._, XXIII., p. 59 ff.]

[Footnote 97: Cf. Lehman's investigations of involuntary whispering,
"Aberglaube und Zauberei," 1898, p. 385 ff.]

[Footnote 98: Thus Flournoy writes, "Dans un premier essai Léopold
(H.S.'s control-spirit) ne réussit qu'à donner ses intimations et sa
pronunciation à Helen: après une séance où elle avait vivement souffert
dans la bouche et le cou comme si on lui travaillait ou lui enlevait les
organes vocaux, elle se mit à causer très naturellement."]

[Footnote 99: Loewenfeld, _Arch. f. Psych._, XXIII., 60.]

[Footnote 100: This behaviour recalls Flournoy's observations: "Whilst
H.S. as a somnambule speaks as Marie Antoinette, the arms of H.S. do not
belong to the somnambulic personality, but to the automatism Leopold,
who converses by gestures with the observer" (Flournoy, _l.c._, p. 125).]

[Footnote 101: Dessoir, "Das Doppel-Ich," II. Aufl., 1896, p. 29.]

[Footnote 102: Janet, "L'anesthésie hystérique," _Arch. d'Neur._, 69,
1892.]

[Footnote 103: Graeter, _Zeit. f. Hypnotismus_, VIII., p. 129.]

[Footnote 104: The hysterical attack is not a purely psychical process.
By the psychic processes only a pre-formed mechanism is set free, which
has nothing to do with psychic processes in and for themselves (Karplus,
_Jahr. f. Psych._, XVII.).]

[Footnote 105: Carl Hauptmann, in his drama "Die Bergschmiede," has
made use of the objectivation of certain linked association-complexes.
In this play the treasure-seeker is met on a gloomy night by a
hallucination of his entire better self.]

[Footnote 106: Freud, "The Interpretation of Dreams." See also Breuer
and Freud's "Studies on Hysteria," 1895.]

[Footnote 107: Pelman, _Allg. Zeit. f. Psych._, XXI., p. 74.]

[Footnote 108: _Allg. Zeit. f. Psych._, XXII., p. 407.]

[Footnote 109: Flournoy, _l.c._, p. 28.]

[Footnote 110: Binet, "Les Altérations," p. 125. Cf. also Loewenfeld's
statements on the subject in "Hypnotismus," 1901.]

[Footnote 111: _Cryptomnesia_ must not be regarded as synonymous with
_Hypermnesia_; by the latter term is meant the abnormal quickening of
the power of recollection which reproduces the memory-pictures as such.]

[Footnote 112: "Has any one at the end of the nineteenth century any
clear conception of what the poets in vigorous ages called inspiration?
If not, I will describe it. The slight remnant of superstition by
itself would scarcely have sufficed to reject the idea of being merely
incarnation, merely mouthpiece, merely the medium of superior forces.
The concept revelation in the sense that quite suddenly, with ineffable
certainty and delicacy, something is seen, something is heard, something
convulsing and breaking into one's inmost self, does but describe
the fact. You hear--you do not seek; you accept--asking not who is
the giver. Like lightning, flashes the thought, compelling without
hesitation as to form--I have had no choice" (Nietzsche's "Works," vol.
III., p. 482.).]

[Footnote 113: "There is an ecstasy so great that the immense strain of
it is sometimes relaxed by a flood of tears, during which one's steps
now involuntarily rush, and anon involuntarily lag. There is the feeling
that one is utterly out of hand, with the very distinct consciousness of
an endless number of fine thrills and titillations descending to one's
very toes;--there is a depth of happiness in which the most painful and
gloomy parts do not act as antitheses to the rest, but are produced and
required as necessary shades of colour in such an overflow of light"
(Nietzsche, "Ecce Homo," vol. XVII. of English translation, by A. M.
Ludovici, p. 103).]

[Footnote 114: Eckermann, "Conversations with Goethe," vol. III.]

[Footnote 115: Cf. Goerres, "Die christliche Mystik."]

[Footnote 116: Bresler, "Kulturhistorischer Beitrag zur Hysterie,"
_Allg. Zeits. f. Psych._ LIII., p. 333.]

[Footnote 117: Zündel, "Biographie Blumhardt's."]

[Footnote 118: "Le baragouin rapide et confus dont on ne peut jamais
obtenir la signification, probablement parce qu'il n'en a en effet
aucune, n'est qu'un pseudo-langage (p. 193) analogue au baragouinage par
lequel les enfants se donnent parfois dans leurs jeux l'illusion qu'ils
parlent chinois, indien ou 'sauvage'" (p. 152, Flournoy, _l.c._).]

[Footnote 119: See p. 63.]

[Footnote 120: Flournoy, _l.c._, p. 378.]

[Footnote 121: For a case of this kind see Krafft Ebing, "Lehrbuch," 4th
edition, p. 578.]

[Footnote 122: The limitation of the associative processes and the
concentration of attention upon a definite sphere of presentation can
also lead to the development of new ideas, which no effort of will
in the waking state would have been able to accomplish (Loewenfeld,
"Hypnotismus," p. 289).]

[Footnote 123: Zschokke, "Eine Selbstschau," III., Aufl. Aarau, 1843, p.
227 ff.]

[Footnote 124: Gilles de la Tourette says, "We have seen somnambulic
girls, poor, uneducated, quite stupid in the waking state, whose whole
appearance altered so soon as they were sent to sleep. Whilst previously
they were boring, now they are lively, alert, sometimes even witty" (Cf.
Loewenfeld, _l.c._, p. 132).]




CHAPTER II

THE ASSOCIATION METHOD


LECTURE I[125]

When you honoured me with an invitation to lecture at Clark University,
a wish was expressed that I should speak about my methods of work, and
especially about the psychology of childhood. I hope to accomplish this
task in the following manner:--

In my first lecture I will give to you the view points of my association
methods; in my second I will discuss the significance of the familiar
constellations; while in my third lecture I shall enter more fully into
the psychology of the child.

I might confine myself exclusively to my theoretical views, but I
believe it will be better to illustrate my lectures with as many
practical examples as possible. We will therefore occupy ourselves first
with the association test which has been of great value to me both
practically and theoretically. The history of the association method in
vogue in psychology, as well as the method itself, is, of course, so
familiar to you that there is no need to enlarge upon it. For practical
purposes I make use of the following formula:--

    1. head
    2. green
    3. water
    4. to sing
    5. dead
    6. long
    7. ship
    8. to pay
    9. window
    10. friendly
    11. to cook
    12. to ask
    13. cold
    14. stem
    15. to dance
    16. village
    17. lake
    18. sick
    19. pride
    20. to cook
    21. ink
    22. angry
    23. needle
    24. to swim
    25. voyage
    26. blue
    27. lamp
    28. to sin
    29. bread
    30. rich
    31. tree
    32. to prick
    33. pity
    34. yellow
    35. mountain
    36. to die
    37. salt
    38. new
    39. custom
    40. to pray
    41. money
    42. foolish
    43. pamphlet
    44. despise
    45. finger
    46. expensive
    47. bird
    48. to fall
    49. book
    50. unjust
    51. frog
    52. to part
    53. hunger
    54. white
    55. child
    56. to take care
    57. lead pencil
    58. sad
    59. plum
    60. to marry
    61. house
    62. dear
    63. glass
    64. to quarrel
    65. fur
    66. big
    67. carrot
    68. to paint
    69. part
    70. old
    71. flower
    72. to beat
    73. box
    74. wild
    75. family
    76. to wash
    77. cow
    78. friend
    79. luck
    80. lie
    81. deportment
    82. narrow
    83. brother
    84. to fear
    85. stork
    86. false
    87. anxiety
    88. to kiss
    89. bride
    90. pure
    91. door
    92. to choose
    93. hay
    94. contented
    95. ridicule
    96. to sleep
    97. month
    98. nice
    99. woman
    100. to abuse

This formula has been constructed after many years of experience. The
words are chosen and partially arranged in such a manner as to strike
easily almost all complexes which occur in practice. As shown above,
there is a regulated mixing of the grammatical qualities of the words.
For this there are definite reasons.[126]

Before the experiment begins the test person receives the following
instruction: "Answer as quickly as possible with the first word that
occurs to your mind." This instruction is so simple that it can easily
be followed. The work itself, moreover, appears extremely easy, so that
it might be expected any one could accomplish it with the greatest
facility and promptitude. But, contrary to expectation, the behaviour is
quite otherwise.


I.--AN EXAMPLE OF A NORMAL REACTION TYPE.

    --------+----------------+--------------------------+----------------
            |   Reaction     |                          |
    Stimulus|     Time.      |                          |
      word. |Unit 0·2 second.|        Reaction.         |  Reproduction.
    --------+----------------+--------------------------+----------------
    head    |       9        |      foot                |part of the body
    green   |      11        |      blouse              |
    water   |      14        |      clear               |light
    to sing |       6        |      children            |
    dead    |      11        |      do not like         |
    long    |       6        |      short               |I, tall
    ship    |       7        |      forth               |
    to pay  |       9        |      bills               |
    window  |       9        |      room                |
    friendly|      10        |      children            |
    table   |       9        |      chair               |room
    to ask  |      10        |      all kinds           |
    cold    |       7        |      warm                |
    stem    |       6        |      flower              |
    to dance|       9        |      I . .               |like
    lake    |       8        |      Zürich              |
    sick    |       8        |      sister              |
    pride   |       6        |      people              |
    to cook |       7        |      woman               |
    ink     |       5        |      black               |
    angry   |      10        |      children            |people
    needle  |       9        |      to prick            |
    to swim |      10        |      healthy             |
    voyage  |       9        |      England             |
    blue    |      10        |      pretty              |like
    lamp    |       6        |      light               |
    to sin  |       8        |      much                |people
    bread   |      10        |      good                |like, necessary
    rich    |       9        |      nice                |
    tree    |       6        |      green               |
    to prick|       9        |      need                |
    --------+----------------+--------------------------+----------------


II.--AN EXAMPLE OF AN HYSTERICAL REACTION TYPE.

    --------+----------------+--------------------------+----------------
            |   Reaction     |                          |
    Stimulus|     Time.      |                          |
      word. |Unit 0·2 second.|       Reaction.          |  Reproduction.
    --------+----------------+--------------------------+----------------
    needle  |       7        | to sew                   |
    to swim |       9        | water                    |ship [127]
    [128]   |                |                          |
    voyage  |      35        | to ride, motion, voyager |
    blue    |      10        | colour                   |
    lamp    |       7        | to burn                  |
    --------+----------------+--------------------------+----------------
    to sin  |      22        |this idea is totally      |
            |                |  strange to me, I do not |
            |                |  recognize it            |
    bread   |      10        |to eat                    |
   rich[129]|      50        |money, I don't know       |possession
    brown   |       6        |nature                    |green
    to prick|       9        |needle                    |
    pity    |      12        |feeling                   |
    yellow  |       9        |colour                    |
    mountain|       8        |high                      |
    to die  |       8        |to perish                 |
    salt    |      15        |salty (laughs) I don't    |
            |                |  know                    |NaCl
    new     |      15        |old                       |as an opposite
    custom  |      10        |good                      |barbaric
    to pray |      12        |Deity                     |
    money   |      10        |wealth                    |
    foolish |      12        |narrow minded, restricted | ?
    pamphlet|      10        |paper                     |
    despise |      30        |that is a complicated, too| ?
            |                |  foolish                 |
    finger  |       8        |hand, not only hand, but  |
            |                |  also foot, a joint,     |
            |                |  member, extremity       |
    dear    |      14        |to pay (laughs)           |
    bird    |       8        |to fly                    |
    to fall |      30        |_tomber_, I will say no   | ?
            |                |  more, what do you       |
            |                |  mean by fall?           |
    book    |       6        |to read                   |
    unjust  |       8        |just                      |
    frog    |      11        |quack                     |
    to part |      30        |what does that mean?      | ?
    hunger  |      10        |to eat                    |
    white   |      12        |colour, everything        |
            |                |  possible, light         |
    child   |      10        |little, I did not hear    | ?
            |                |  well, _bébé_            |
    to take |                |                          |
      care  |      14        |attention                 |
    lead    |                |to draw, everything       |
      pencil|       8        |  possible can be drawn   |
    sad     |       9        |to weep, that is not      |to be
            |                |  always the case         |
    plum    |      16        |to eat a plum, pluck what |fruit
            |                |  do you mean by it? Is   |
            |                |  that symbolic?          |
    to marry|      27        |how can you? reunion,     |union, alliance
            |                |  union                   |
    --------+----------------+--------------------------+----------------

The following diagrams illustrate the reaction times in an association
experiment in four normal test-persons. The height of each column
denotes the length of the reaction time.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

The succeeding diagram shows the course of the reaction time in
hysterical individuals. The light cross-hatched columns denote the
places where the test-person was unable to react (so-called failures to
react).

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

The first thing that strikes us is the fact that many test-persons
show a marked prolongation of the reaction time. This would seem to
be suggestive of intellectual difficulties,--wrongly however, for we
are often dealing with very intelligent persons of fluent speech. The
explanation lies rather in the emotions. In order to understand the
matter, comprehensively, we must bear in mind that the association
experiments cannot deal with a separated psychic function, for any
psychic occurrence is never a thing in itself, but is always the
resultant of the entire psychological past. The association experiment,
too, is not merely a method for the reproduction of separated word
couplets, but it is a kind of pastime, a conversation between
experimenter and test-person. In a certain sense it is still more
than that. Words really represent condensed actions, situations, and
things. When I give a stimulus word to the test-person, which denotes
an action, it is as if I represented to him the action itself, and
asked him, "How do you behave towards it? What do you think of it?
What would you do in this situation?" If I were a magician, I should
cause the situation corresponding to the stimulus word to appear in
reality, and placing the test-person in its midst, I should then study
his manner of reaction. The result of my stimulus words would thus
undoubtedly approach infinitely nearer perfection. But as we are not
magicians, we must be contented with the linguistic substitutes for
reality; at the same time we must not forget that the stimulus word
will almost without exception conjure up its corresponding situation.
All depends on how the test-person reacts to this situation. The word
"bride" or "bridegroom" will not evoke a simple reaction in a young
lady; but the reaction will be deeply influenced by the strong feeling
tones evoked, the more so if the experimenter be a man. It thus happens
that the test-person is often unable to react quickly and smoothly
to all stimulus words. There are certain stimulus words which denote
actions, situations, or things, about which the test-person cannot think
quickly and surely, and this fact is demonstrated in the association
experiments. The examples which I have just given show an abundance of
long reaction times and other disturbances. In this case the reaction
to the stimulus word is in some way impeded, that is, the adaptation to
the stimulus word is disturbed. The stimulus words therefore act upon us
just as reality acts; indeed, a person who shows such great disturbances
to the stimulus words, is in a certain sense but imperfectly adapted to
reality. Disease itself is an imperfect adaptation; hence in this case
we are dealing with something morbid in the psyche,--with something
which is either temporarily or persistently pathological in character,
that is, we are dealing with a psychoneurosis, with a functional
disturbance of the mind. This rule, however, as we shall see later, is
not without its exceptions.

Let us, in the first place, continue the discussion concerning the
prolonged reaction time. It often happens that the test-person actually
does _not_ know what to answer to the stimulus word. He waives any
reaction, and for the moment he totally fails to obey the original
instructions, and shows himself incapable of adapting himself to the
experimenter. If this phenomenon occurs frequently in an experiment,
it signifies a high degree of disturbance in adjustment. I would
call attention to the fact that it is quite indifferent what reason
the test-person gives for the refusal. Some find that too many ideas
suddenly occur to them; others, that they suffer from a deficiency of
ideas. In most cases, however, the difficulties first perceived are so
deterrent that they actually give up the whole reaction. The following
example shows a case of hysteria with many failures of reaction:--

    ----------------------------------------------------------------------
      Stimulus     | Reaction Time. |                      |
        word.      |Unit 0·2 second.|       Reaction.      | Reproduction.
    ---------------+----------------+----------------------+--------------
    to sing        |       9        | nice                 |     +[130]
    dead           |      15        | awful                |     ?
    long[131]      |      40        | the time, the journey|     ?
    ship[132]      |                |                      |     +
    to pay         |      11        | money                |
    window         |      10        | big                  |     high
    friendly       |      50        | a man                |     human
    to cook        |      10        | soup                 |     +
    ink            |      9         | black or blue        |     +
    angry          |                |                      |     bad
    needle         |       9        | to sew               |     +
    lamp           |      14        | light                |     +
    to sin         |                |                      |
    bread          |      15        | to eat               |     +
    rich[133][134] |      40        | good, convenient     |     +
    yellow         |      18        | paper                |     colour
    mountain       |      10        | high                 |     +
    to die         |      15        | awful                |     +
    salt[135]      |      25        | salty                |     +
    new            |                |                      |   good, nice
    custom[136]    |                |                      |
    to pray        |                |                      |
    money[137]     |      35        | to buy, one is able  |     +
    pamphlet       |      16        | to write             |     +
    to despise[138]|      22        | people               |     +
    finger         |                |                      |
    dear           |      12        | thing                |     +
    bird           |      12        | sings or flies       |     +
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------

In example II. we find a characteristic phenomenon. The test-person
is not content with the requirements of the instruction, that is, she
is not satisfied with _one_ word, but reacts with many words. She
apparently does more and better than the instruction requires, but in
so doing she does not fulfil the requirements of the instruction. Thus
she reacts:--custom--good--barbaric; foolish--narrow minded--restricted;
family--big--small--everything possible.

These examples show in the first place that many other words connect
themselves with the reaction word. The test person is unable to suppress
the ideas which subsequently occur to her. She also pursues a certain
tendency which perhaps is more exactly expressed in the following
reaction: new--old--as an opposite. The addition of "as an opposite"
denotes that the test-person has the desire to add something explanatory
or supplementary. This tendency is also shown in the following reaction:
finger--not only hand, also foot--a limb--member--extremity.

Here we have a whole series of supplements. It seems as if the reaction
were not sufficient for the test-person, something else must always
be added, as if what has already been said were incorrect or in some
way imperfect. This feeling is what Janet designates the "_sentiment
d'incomplétude_," but this by no means explains everything. I go
somewhat deeply into this phenomenon because it is very frequently met
with in neurotic individuals. It is not merely a small and unimportant
subsidiary manifestation demonstrable in an insignificant experiment,
but rather an elemental and universal manifestation which plays a _rôle_
in other ways in the psychic life of neurotics.

By his desire to supplement, the test-person betrays a tendency to give
the experimenter more than he wants, he actually makes great efforts to
find further mental occurrences in order finally to discover something
quite satisfactory. If we translate this observation into the psychology
of everyday life, it signifies that the test-person has a constant
tendency to give to others more feeling than is required and expected.
According to Freud, this is a sign of a reinforced object-libido, that
is, it is a compensation for an inner want of satisfaction and voidness
of feeling. This elementary observation therefore displays one of the
characteristics of hysterics, namely, the tendency to allow themselves
to be carried away by everything, to attach themselves enthusiastically
to everything, and always to promise too much and hence perform too
little. Patients with this symptom are, in my experience, always hard
to deal with; at first they are enthusiastically enamoured of the
physician, for a time going so far as to accept everything he says
blindly; but they soon merge into an equally blind resistance against
him, thus rendering any educative influence absolutely impossible.

We see therefore in this type of reaction an expression of a tendency to
give more than is asked or expected. This tendency betrays itself also
in other failures to follow the instruction:--

    to quarrel--angry--different things--I always quarrel at home;
    to marry--how can you marry?--reunion--union;
    plum--to eat--to pluck--what do you mean by it?--is it symbolic?
    to sin--this idea is quite strange to me, I do not recognise it.

These reactions show that the test-person gets away altogether from the
situation of the experiment. For the instruction was, that he should
answer only with the first word which occurs to him. But here we note
that the stimulus words act with excessive strength, that they are taken
as if they were direct personal questions. The test-person entirely
forgets that we deal with mere words which stand in print before us, but
finds a personal meaning in them; he tries to divine their intention and
defend himself against them, thus altogether forgetting the original
instructions.

This elementary observation discloses another common peculiarity of
hysterics, namely, that of taking everything personally, of never being
able to remain objective, and of allowing themselves to be carried away
by momentary impressions; this again shows the characteristics of the
enhanced object-libido.

Yet another sign of impeded adaptation is the often occurring
_repetition of the stimulus words_. The test-persons repeat the stimulus
word as if they had not heard or understood it distinctly. They repeat
it just as we repeat a difficult question in order to grasp it better
before answering. This same tendency is shown in the experiment. The
questions are repeated because the stimulus words act on hysterical
individuals in much the same way as difficult personal questions. In
principle it is the same phenomenon as the subsequent completion of the
reaction.

In many experiments we observe that the same reaction constantly
reappears to the most varied stimulus words. These words seem to possess
a special reproduction tendency, and it is very interesting to examine
their relationship to the test-person. For example, I have observed a
case in which the patient repeated the word "short" a great many times
and often in places where it had no meaning. The test-person could not
directly state the reason for the repetition of the word "short." From
experience I knew that such predicates always relate either to the
test-person himself or to the person nearest to him. I assumed that
in this word "short" he designated himself, and that in this way he
helped to express something very painful to him. The test-person is
of very small stature. He is the youngest of four brothers, who, in
contrast to himself, are all tall. He was always the "_child_" in the
family; he was nicknamed "Short" and was treated by all as the "little
one." This resulted in a total loss of self-confidence. Although he was
intelligent, and despite long study, he could not decide to present
himself for examination; he finally became impotent, and merged into a
psychosis in which, whenever he was alone, he took delight in walking
about in his room on his toes in order to appear taller. The word
"short," therefore, stood to him for a great many painful experiences.
This is usually the case with the perseverated words; they always
contain something of importance for the individual psychology of the
test-person.

The signs thus far discussed are not found spread about in an arbitrary
way through the whole experiment, but are seen in very definite places,
namely, where the stimulus words strike against emotionally accentuated
complexes. This observation is the foundation of the so-called
"diagnosis of facts" (_Tatbestandsdiagnostik_). This method is employed
to discover, by means of an association experiment, which is the culprit
among a number of persons suspected of a crime. That this is possible I
will demonstrate by the brief recital of a concrete case.

On the 6th of February, 1908, our supervisor reported to me that a
nurse complained to her of having been robbed during the forenoon of
the previous day. The facts were as follows: The nurse kept her money,
amounting to 70 francs, in a pocket-book which she had placed in her
cupboard where she also kept her clothes. The cupboard contained two
compartments, of which one belonged to the nurse who was robbed, and the
other to the head nurse. These two nurses and a third one, who was an
intimate friend of the head nurse, slept in the room where the cupboard
was. This room was in a section which was occupied in common by six
nurses who had at all times free access to the room. Given such a state
of affairs it is not to be wondered that the supervisor shrugged her
shoulders when I asked her whom she most suspected.

Further investigation showed that on the day of the theft, the
above-mentioned friend of the head nurse was slightly indisposed and
remained the whole morning in the room in bed. Hence, unless she herself
was the thief, the theft could have taken place only in the afternoon.
Of four other nurses upon whom suspicion could possibly fall, there was
one who attended regularly to the cleaning of the room in question,
while the remaining three had nothing to do in it, nor was it shown that
any of them had spent any time there on the previous day.

It was therefore natural that the last three nurses should be regarded
for the time being as less implicated, so I began by subjecting the
first three to the experiment.

From the information I had obtained of the case, I knew that the
cupboard was locked but that the key was kept near by in a very
conspicuous place, that on opening the cupboard the first thing which
would strike the eye was a fur boa, and, moreover, that the pocket-book
was between some linen in an inconspicuous place. The pocket-book was of
dark reddish leather, and contained the following objects: a 50-franc
banknote, a 20-franc piece, some centimes, a small silver watch-chain, a
stencil used in the lunatic asylum to mark the kitchen utensils, and a
small receipt from Dosenbach's shoeshop in Zürich.

Besides the plaintiff, only the head nurse knew the exact particulars
of the deed, for as soon as the former missed her money she immediately
asked the head nurse to help her find it, thus the head nurse had
been able to learn the smallest details, which naturally rendered the
experiment still more difficult, for she was precisely the one most
suspected. The conditions for the experiment were better for the others,
since they knew nothing concerning the particulars of the deed, and
some not even that a theft had been committed. As critical stimulus
words I selected the name of the robbed nurse, plus the following words:
cupboard, door, open, key, yesterday, banknote, gold, 70, 50, 20, money,
watch, pocket-book, chain, silver, to hide, fur, dark reddish, leather,
centimes, stencil, receipt, Dosenbach. Besides these words which
referred directly to the deed, I took also the following, which had a
special effective value: theft, to take, to steal, suspicion, blame,
court, police, to lie, to fear, to discover, to arrest, innocent.

The objection is often made to the last species of words that they
may produce a strong affective resentment even in innocent persons,
and for that reason one cannot attribute to them any comparative
value. Nevertheless, it may always be questioned whether the affective
resentment of an innocent person will have the same effect on the
association as that of a guilty one, and that question can only
be authoritatively answered by experience. Until the contrary is
demonstrated, I maintain that words of the above-mentioned type may
profitably be used.

I distributed these critical words among twice as many indifferent
stimulus words in such a manner that each critical word was followed by
two indifferent ones. As a rule it is well to follow up the critical
words by indifferent words in order that the action of the first may be
clearly distinguished. But one may also follow up one critical word by
another, especially if one wishes to bring into relief the action of the
second. Thus I placed together "darkish red" and "leather," and "chain"
and "silver."

After this preparatory work I undertook the experiment with the three
above-mentioned nurses. Following the order of the experiment, I shall
denote the friend of the head nurse by the letter A, the head nurse
by B, and the nurse who attended to the cleaning of the room by C. As
examinations of this kind can be rendered into a foreign tongue only
with the greatest difficulty, I will content myself with presenting the
general results, and with giving some examples. I first undertook the
experiment with A, and judging by the circumstances she appeared only
slightly moved. B was next examined; she showed marked excitement, her
pulse being 120 per minute immediately after the experiment. The last to
be examined was C. She was the most tranquil of the three; she displayed
but little embarrassment, and only in the course of the experiment
did it occur to her that she was suspected of stealing, a fact which
manifestly disturbed her towards the end of the experiment.

The general impression from the examination spoke strongly against the
head nurse B. It seemed to me that she evinced a very "suspicious," or
I might almost say, "impudent" countenance. With the definite idea of
finding in her the guilty one I set about adding up the results. You
will see that I was wrong in my surmise and that the test proved my
error.

One can make use of many special methods of computing, but they are
not all equally good and equally exact. (One must always resort to
calculation, as appearances are enormously deceptive.) The method
which is most to be recommended is that of the probable average of the
reaction time. It shows at a glance the difficulties which the person in
the experiment had to overcome in the reaction.

The technique of this calculation is very simple. The probable average
is the middle number of the various reaction times arranged in a series.
The reaction times are, for example,[139] placed in the following
manner: 5, 5, 5, 7, 7, 7, 7, 8, 9, 9, 9, 12, 13, 14. The number found in
the middle (8) is the probable average of this series.

The probable averages of the reaction are:

     A     B     C
    10·0  12·0  13·5.

No conclusions can be drawn from this result. But the average
reaction times calculated separately for the indifferent reactions,
for the critical, and for those immediately following the critical
(post-critical) are more interesting.

From this example we see that whereas A has the shortest reaction time
for the indifferent reactions, she shows in comparison to the other two
persons of the experiment, the longest time for the critical reactions.

THE PROBABLE AVERAGE OF THE REACTION TIME.

    ---------------------------------------------
             for            |  A   |  B   |  C
    ------------------------+------+------+------
    Indifferent reactions   | 10·0 | 11·0 | 12·0
    Critical reactions      | 16·0 | 13·0 | 15·0
    Post-critical reactions | 10·0 | 11·0 | 13·0
    ---------------------------------------------

The difference between the reaction times, let us say between the
indifferent and the critical, is 6 for A, 2 for B, and 3 for C, that is,
it is more than double for A when compared with the other two persons.

In the same way we can calculate how many complex indicators there are
on an average for the indifferent, critical, etc., reactions.

THE AVERAGE COMPLEX-INDICATORS FOR EACH REACTION.

    ---------------------------------------------
             for            |  A   |  B   |  C
    ------------------------+------+------+------
    Indifferent reactions   |  0·6 |  0·9 | 0·8
    Critical reactions      |  1·3 |  0·9 | 1·2
    Post-critical reactions |  0·6 |  1·0 | 0·8
    ---------------------------------------------

The difference between the indifferent and critical reactions for A =
0·7, for B = 0, for C = 0·4. A is again the highest.

Another question to consider is, the proportion of imperfect reactions
in each case.

The result for A = 34%, for B = 28%, and for C = 30%.

Here, too, A reaches the highest value, and in this, I believe, we see
the characteristic moment of the guilt-complex in A. I am, however,
unable to explain here circumstantially the reasons why I maintain that
memory errors are related to an emotional complex, as this would lead me
beyond the limits of the present work. I therefore refer the reader to
my work "_Ueber die Reproductionsstörrungen im Associationsexperiment_"
(IX Beitrag der Diagnost. Associat. Studien).[140]

As it often happens that an association of strong feeling tone produces
in the experiment a perseveration, with the result that not only the
critical association, but also two or three successive associations are
imperfectly reproduced, it will be very interesting to see how many
imperfect reproductions are so arranged in the series in our cases.
The result of computation shows that the imperfect reproductions thus
arranged in series are for A 64·7%, for B 55·5%, and for C 30·0%.

Again we find that A has the greatest percentage. To be sure, this
may partially depend on the fact that A also possesses the greatest
number of imperfect reproductions. Given a small number of reactions,
it is usual that the greater the total number of the same, the more the
imperfect reactions will occur in groups. But this cannot account for
the high proportion in our case, where, on the other hand, B and C have
not a much smaller number of imperfect reactions when compared to A. It
is significant that C with her slight emotions during the experiment
shows the minimum of imperfect reproductions arranged in series.

As imperfect reproductions are also complex indicators, it is necessary
to see how they distribute themselves in respect to the indifferent,
critical, etc., reactions.

It is hardly necessary to bring into prominence the differences between
the indifferent and the critical reactions of the various subjects as
shown by the resulting numbers of the table. In this respect, too, A
occupies first place.

IMPERFECT REPRODUCTIONS WHICH OCCUR.

    ----------------------------------------
              in            |  A |  B |  C
    ------------------------+----+----+-----
    Indifferent reactions   | 10 | 12 | 11
    Critical reactions      | 19 |  9 | 12
    Post-critical reactions |  5 |  7 |  7
    ----------------------------------------

Naturally, here, too, there is a probability that the greater the
number of the imperfect reproductions the greater is their number in
the critical reactions. If we suppose that the imperfect reproductions
are distributed regularly and without choice, among all the reactions,
there will be a greater number of them for A (in comparison with B and
C) even as reactions to critical words, since A has the greater number
of imperfect reproductions. Admitting such a uniform distribution of the
imperfect reproductions, it is easy to calculate how many we ought to
expect to belong to each individual kind of reaction.

From this calculation it appears that the disturbances of reproductions
which concern the critical reactions for A greatly surpass the number
expected, for C they are 0·9 higher, while for B they are lower.

IMPERFECT REPRODUCTIONS.

    ----------------------------------------------
           Which may be expected                 |
    ---------------------------------------------+
       | Indifferent |  Critical | Post-critical |
    For|  Reactions. | Reactions.|  Reactions.   |
    ---+-------------+-----------+---------------+
     A |     11·2    |    12·5   |     10·2      |
     B |      9·2    |    10·3   |      8·4      |
     C |      9·9    |    11·1   |      9·0      |
    ----------------------------------------------

       -------------------------------------------
       |           Which really occur
       --------------+----------------------------
       | Indifferent | Critical   | Post-critical
    For| Reactions.  | Reactions. |  Reactions.
       --------------+------------+---------------
     A |    10       |    19      |      5
     B |    12       |     9      |      7
     C |    11       |    12      |      7
       -------------------------------------------

All this points to the fact that in the subject A the critical stimulus
words acted with the greatest intensity, and hence the greatest
suspicion falls on A. Practically relying on the test one may assume the
probability of this person's guilt. The same evening A made a complete
confession of the theft, and thus the success of the experiment was
confirmed.

Such a result is undoubtedly of scientific interest and worthy of
serious consideration. There is much in experimental psychology which
is of less use than the material exemplified in this test. Putting the
theoretical interest altogether aside, we have here something that is
not to be despised from a practical point of view, to wit, a culprit
has been brought to light in a much easier and shorter way than is
customary. What has been possible once or twice ought to be possible
again, and it is well worth while to investigate some means of rendering
the method increasingly capable of rapid and sure results.

This application of the experiment shows that it is possible to strike
a concealed, indeed an unconscious complex by means of a stimulus word;
and conversely we may assume with great certainty that behind a reaction
which shows a complex indicator there is a hidden complex, even though
the test-person strongly denies it. One must get rid of the idea that
educated and intelligent test-persons are able to see and admit their
own complexes. Every human mind contains much that is unacknowledged
and hence unconscious as such; and no one can boast that he stands
completely above his complexes. Those who persist in maintaining that
they can, are not aware of the spectacles upon their noses.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has long been thought that the association experiment enables one
to distinguish certain _intellectual_ types. That is not the case. The
experiment does not give us any particular insight into the purely
intellectual, but rather into the emotional processes. To be sure we
can erect certain types of reaction; they are not, however, based on
intellectual peculiarities, but depend entirely on the _proportionate
emotional states_. Educated test-persons usually show superficial and
linguistically deep-rooted associations, whereas the uneducated form
more valuable associations and often of ingenious significance. This
behaviour would be paradoxical from an intellectual view-point. The
meaningful associations of the uneducated are not really the product of
intellectual thinking, but are simply the results of a special emotional
state. The whole thing is more important to the uneducated, his
emotion is greater, and for that reason he pays more attention to the
experiment than the educated person, and his associations are therefore
more significant. Apart from those determined by education, we have to
consider three principal individual types:

1. An objective type with undisturbed reactions.

2. A so-called complex-type with many disturbances in the experiment
occasioned by the constellation of a complex.

3. A so-called definition-type. The peculiarity of this type consists in
the fact that the reaction always gives an explanation or a definition
of the content of the stimulus word; _e.g._:

    apple,--a tree-fruit;
    table,--a piece of household furniture;
    to promenade,--an activity;
    father,--chief of the family.

This type is chiefly found in stupid persons, and it is therefore quite
usual in imbecility. But it can also be found in persons who are not
really stupid, but who do not wish _to be taken as stupid_. Thus a young
student from whom associations were taken by an older intelligent woman
student reacted altogether with definitions. The test-person was of
the opinion that it was an examination in intelligence, and therefore
directed most of his attention to the significance of the stimulus
words; his associations, therefore, looked like those of an idiot. All
idiots, however, do not react with definitions; probably only those
react in this way who would like to appear smarter than they are, that
is, those to whom their stupidity is painful. I call this widespread
complex the "intelligence-complex." A normal test-person reacts in a
most overdrawn manner as follows:

    anxiety--heart anguish;
    to kiss--love's unfolding;
    to kiss--perception of friendship.

This type gives a constrained and unnatural impression. The test-persons
wish to be more than they are, they wish to exert more influence than
they really have. Hence we see that persons with an intelligence-complex
are usually unnatural and constrained; that they are always somewhat
stilted, or flowery; they show a predilection for complicated foreign
words, high-sounding quotations, and other intellectual ornaments.
In this way they wish to influence their fellow-beings, they wish
to impress others with their apparent education and intelligence,
and thus to compensate for their painful feeling of stupidity. The
definition-type is closely related to the predicate-type, or, to express
it more precisely, to the predicate-type expressing personal judgment
(_Wertprädikattypus_). For example:

    flower--pretty;
    money--convenient;
    animal--ugly;
    knife--dangerous;
    death--ghastly.

In the definition type the _intellectual_ significance of the stimulus
word is rendered prominent, but in the predicate type its _emotional_
significance. There are predicate-types which show great exaggeration
where reactions such as the following appear:

    piano--horrible;
    to sing--heavenly;
    mother--ardently loved;
    father--something good, nice, holy.

In the definition-type an absolutely _intellectual_ make-up is
manifested or rather simulated, but here there is a very _emotional_
one. Yet, just as the definition-type really conceals a lack of
intelligence, so the excessive _emotional_ expression conceals or
overcompensates an emotional deficiency. This conclusion is very
interestingly illustrated by the following discovery:--On investigating
the influence of the familiar milieus on the association-type it was
found that young people seldom possess a predicate-type, but that, on
the other hand, the predicate-type increases in frequency with advancing
age. In women the increase of the predicate-type begins a little after
the 40th year, and in men after the 60th. That is the precise time when,
owing to the deficiency of sexuality, there actually occurs considerable
emotional loss. If a test-person evinces a distinct predicate-type, it
may always be inferred that a marked internal emotional deficiency is
thereby compensated. Still, one cannot reason conversely, namely, that
an inner emotional deficiency must produce a predicate-type, no more
than that idiocy directly produces a definition-type. A predicate-type
can also betray itself through the external behaviour, as, for example,
through a particular affectation, enthusiastic exclamations, an
embellished behaviour, and the constrained sounding language so often
observed in society.

The complex-type shows no particular tendency except the _concealment_
of a complex, whereas the definition and predicate types betray a
positive tendency to exert in some way a _definite_ influence on the
experimenter. But whereas the definition-type tends to bring to light
its intelligence, the predicate-type displays its emotion. I need hardly
add of what importance such determinations are for the diagnosis of
character.

After finishing an association experiment I usually add another of a
different kind, the so-called _reproduction_ experiment. I repeat the
same stimulus words and ask the test-persons whether they still remember
their former reactions. In many instances the memory fails, and as
experience shows, these locations are stimulus words which touched an
emotionally accentuated complex, or stimulus words immediately following
such critical words.

This phenomenon has been designated as paradoxical and contrary to all
experience. For it is known that emotionally accentuated things are
better retained in memory than indifferent things. This is quite true,
but it does not hold for the _linguistic_ expression of an emotionally
accentuated content. On the contrary, one very easily forgets what he
has said under emotion, one is even apt to contradict himself about
it. Indeed, the efficacy of cross-examinations in court depends on
this fact. The reproduction method therefore serves to render still
more prominent the complex stimulus. In normal persons we usually find
a limited number of false reproductions, seldom more than 19-20 per
cent., while in abnormal persons, especially in hysterics, we often
find from 20-40 per cent. of false reproductions. The reproduction
certainty is therefore in certain cases a measure for the emotivity of
the test-person.

       *       *       *       *       *

By far the larger number of neurotics show a pronounced tendency to
cover up their intimate affairs in impenetrable darkness, even from the
doctor, so that he finds it very difficult to form a proper picture
of the patient's psychology. In such cases I am greatly assisted by
the association experiment. When the experiment is finished, I first
look over the general course of the reaction times. I see a great many
very prolonged intervals; this means that the patient can only adjust
himself with difficulty, that his psychological functions proceed with
marked internal frictions with _resistances_. The greater number of
neurotics react only under great and very definite resistances; there
are, however, others in whom the average reaction times are as short as
in the normal, and in whom the other complex indicators are lacking,
but, despite that fact, they undoubtedly present neurotic symptoms.
These rare cases are especially found among very intelligent and
educated persons, chronic patients who, after many years of practice,
have learned to control their outward behaviour and therefore outwardly
display very little if any trace of their neuroses. The superficial
observer would take them for normal, yet in some places they show
disturbances which betray the repressed complex.

After examining the reaction times I turn my attention to the type of
the association to ascertain with what type I am dealing. If it is a
predicate-type I draw the conclusions which I have detailed above; if it
is a complex type I try to ascertain the nature of the complex. With the
necessary experience one can readily emancipate one's judgment from the
test-person's statements and almost without any previous knowledge of
the test-persons it is possible under certain circumstances to read the
most intimate complexes from the results of the experiment. I look at
first for the reproduction words and put them together, and then I look
for the stimulus words which show the greatest disturbances. In many
cases merely assorting these words suffices to unearth the complex. In
some cases it is necessary to put a question here and there. The matter
is well illustrated by the following concrete example:

It concerns an educated woman of 30 years of age, married three years
previously. Since her marriage she has suffered from episodic excitement
in which she is violently jealous of her husband. The marriage is a
happy one in every other respect, and it should be noted that the
husband gives no cause for the jealousy. The patient is sure that she
loves him and that her excited states are groundless. She cannot imagine
whence these excited states originate, and feels quite perplexed over
them. It is to be noted that she is a catholic and has been brought
up religiously, while her husband is a protestant. This difference of
religion did not admittedly play any part. A more thorough anamnesis
showed the existence of an extreme prudishness. Thus, for example, no
one was allowed to talk in the patient's presence about her sister's
childbirth, because the sexual moment suggested therein caused her the
greatest excitement. She always undressed in the adjoining room and
never in her husband's presence, etc. At the age of 27 she was supposed
to have had no idea how children were born. The associations gave the
results shown in the accompanying chart.

The stimulus words characterised by marked disturbances are the
following: yellow, to pray, to separate, to marry, to quarrel, old,
family, happiness, false, fear, to kiss, bride, to choose, contented.
The strongest disturbances are found in the following stimulus words:
_to pray_, _to marry_, _happiness_, _false_, _fear_, and _contented_.
These words, therefore, more than any others, seem to strike the
complex. The conclusions that can be drawn from this is that she is not
indifferent to the fact that her husband is a protestant, that she again
thinks of praying, believes there is something wrong with marriage,
that she is false, entertains fancies of faithlessness, is afraid (of
the husband? of the future?), she is not contented with her choice
(to choose) and she thinks of separation. The patient therefore has a
separation complex, for she is very discontented with her married life.
When I told her this result she was affected and at first attempted to
deny it, then to mince over it, but finally she admitted everything
I said and added more. She reproduced a large number of fancies of
faithlessness, reproaches against her husband, etc. _Her prudishness
and jealousy were merely a projection of her own sexual wishes on her
husband._ Because she was faithless in her fancies and did not admit it
to herself she was jealous of her husband.

[Illustration: For the stimulus words corresponding to the numbers, see
the list on pages 94 and 95.

The blue columns represent failures of reproductions, the green ones
represent repetitions of stimulus words, and the yellow columns show
those associations in which the patient either laughed or made mistakes,
using many words instead of one. The height of the columns represent the
length of the reaction time.

[_To face p. 118._]
]

It is impossible in a lecture to give a review of all the manifold
uses of the association experiment. I must content myself with having
demonstrated to you a few of its chief uses.


LECTURE II

THE FAMILIAL CONSTELLATIONS

Ladies and Gentlemen: As you have seen, there are manifold ways in which
the association experiment may be employed in practical psychology. I
should like to speak to you to-day about another use of this experiment
which is primarily of theoretical significance. My pupil, Miss Fürst,
M.D., made the following researches: she applied the association
experiment to 24 families, consisting altogether of 100 test-persons;
the resulting material amounted to 22,200 associations. This material
was elaborated in the following manner: Fifteen separate groups were
formed according to logical-linguistic standards, and the associations
were arranged as follows:

                                          Husband    Wife    Difference

      I. Co-ordination                      6·5       0·5        6
     II. Sub and supraordination            7         --         7
    III. Contrast                           --        --        --
     IV. Predicate expressing a personal
           judgment                         8·5      95·0       86·5
       V. Simple predicate                 21·0       3·5       17·5
      VI. Relations of the verb to the
            subject or complement          15·5       0·5       15·0
     VII. Designation of time, etc.        11·0        --       11·0
    VIII. Definition                       11·0        --       11·0
      IX. Coexistence                       1·5        --        1·5
       X. Identity                          0·5       0·5         --
      XI. Motor-speech combination         12·0        --       12·0
     XII. Composition of words               --        --         --
    XIII. Completion of words                --        --         --
     XIV. Clang associations                 --        --         --
      XV. Defective reactions                --        --         --
                                          -----     -----      -----
                          Total              --        --      173·5
                                          173·5
                      Average difference  ----- = 11·5
                                           15

As can be seen from this example, I utilise the difference to
demonstrate the degree of the analogy. In order to find a basis for the
sum of the resemblance I have calculated the differences among all Dr.
Fürst's test-persons, not related among themselves, by comparing every
female test-person with all the other unrelated females; the same has
been done for the male test-persons.

The most marked difference is found in those cases where the two
test-persons compared have no associative quality in common. All the
groups are calculated in percentages, the greatest difference possible
being 200/15 = 13·3 per cent.

       *       *       *       *       *

I. The average difference of male unrelated test-persons is 5·9 per
cent., and that of females of the same group is 6 per cent.

II. The average difference between male related test-persons is 4·1 per
cent., and that between female related tests-persons is 3·8 per cent.
From these numbers we see that relatives show a tendency to agreement in
the reaction type.

    III. Difference between fathers and children = 4·2.
             "         "    mothers  "     "     = 3·5.

The reaction types of children come nearer to the type of the mother
than to the father.

    IV. Difference between fathers and their sons       = 3·1.
            "         "       "     "    "   daughters  = 4·9.
            "         "    mothers  "    "   sons       = 4·7.
            "         "       "     "    "   daughters  = 3·0.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.

Tracing A. ---- father; ..... mother; ++++ daughter.

I. Assoc. by co-ordination; II. sub and supraordination; III. contrast,
etc. (see previous page).]

    V. Difference between brothers = 4·7.
           "         "    sisters  = 5·1.

If the married sisters are omitted from the comparison we get the
following result:

Difference of unmarried sisters = 3·8. These observations show
distinctly that marriage destroys more or less the original agreement,
as the husband belongs to a different type.

Difference between unmarried brothers = 4·8.

Marriage seems to exert no influence on the association forms in men.
Nevertheless, the material which we have at our disposal is not as yet
enough to allow us to draw definite conclusions.

VI. Difference between husband and wife = 4·7.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.

Tracing B. ---- husband; ..... wife.]

This number sums up inadequately the different and very unequal values;
that is to say, there are some cases which show extreme difference and
some which show marked concordance.

The different results are shown in the tracings (Figs. 11-15).

In the tracings I have marked the number of associations of each quality
perpendicularly in percentages. The Roman letters written horizontally
represent the forms of association indicated in the above tables.

Tracing A. The father (black line) shows an objective type, while the
mother and daughter show the pure predicate type with a pronounced
subjective tendency.

Tracing B. The husband and wife agree well in the predicate objective
type, the predicate subjective being somewhat more numerous in the wife.

Tracing C. A very nice agreement between a father and his two daughters.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.

Tracing C. ---- father; ..... 1st daughter; ++++ 2nd daughter.]

Tracing D. Two sisters living together. The dotted line represents the
married sister.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.

Tracing D. ---- single sister; ..... married sister.]

Tracing E. Husband and wife. The wife is a sister of the two women of
tracing D. She approaches very closely to the type of her husband. Her
tracing is the direct opposite of that of her sisters.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.

Tracing E. ---- husband; ..... wife.]

The similarity of the associations is often very extraordinary. I will
reproduce here the associations of a mother and daughter.

     Stimulus Word.       Mother.            Daughter.

    to pay attention   diligent pupil      pupil
    law                command of God      Moses
    dear               child               father and mother
    great              God                 father
    potato             bulbous root        bulbous root
    family             many persons        5 persons
    strange            traveller           traveller
    brother            dear to me          dear
    to kiss            mother              mother
    burn               great pain          painful
    door               wide                big
    hay                dry                 dry
    month              many days           31 days
    air                cool                moist
    coal               sooty               black
    fruit              sweet               sweet
    merry              happy child         child

One might indeed think that in this experiment, where full scope is
given to chance, individuality would become a factor of the utmost
importance, and that therefore one might expect a very great diversity
and lawlessness of associations. But as we see the opposite is the
case. Thus the daughter lives contentedly in the same circle of ideas
as her mother, not only in her thought but in her form of expression;
indeed, she even uses the same words. What could be regarded as more
inconsequent, inconstant, and lawless than a fancy, a rapidly passing
thought? It is not lawless, however, neither is it free, but closely
determined within the limits of the milieu. If, therefore, even the
superficial and manifestly most inconsequent formations of the intellect
are altogether subject to the milieu-constellation, what must we not
expect for the more important conditions of the mind, for the emotions,
wishes, hopes, and intentions? Let us consider a concrete example,
illustrated by tracing A.

The mother is 45 years old and the daughter 16 years. Both have a very
distinct predicate-type expressing personal judgment, both differ from
the father in the most striking manner. The father is a drunkard and
a demoralised creature. We can thus readily understand that his wife
experiences an emotional voidness which she naturally betrays by her
enhanced predicate-type. The same causes cannot, however, operate in
the case of the daughter, for, in the first place, she is not married
to a drunkard, and, in the second, life with all its hopes and promises
still lies before her. It is distinctly unnatural for the daughter
to show an extreme predicate-type expressing personal judgment. She
responds to the stimuli of the environment just like her mother. But
whereas in the mother the type is in a way a natural consequence of her
unhappy condition of life, this condition is entirely lacking in the
daughter. The daughter simply imitates the mother; she merely appears
like the mother. Let us consider what this can signify for a young girl.
If a young girl reacts to the world like an old woman, disappointed
in life, this at once shows unnaturalness and constraint. But more
serious consequences are possible. As you know the predicate-type is a
manifestation of intensive emotions; the emotions are always involved.
Thus we cannot prevent ourselves from responding inwardly, at least,
to the feelings and passions of our immediate environment; we allow
ourselves to be infected and carried away by it. Originally the effects
and their physical manifestations had a biological significance; _i.e._
they were a protective mechanism for the individual and the whole
herd. If we manifest emotions, we can with certainty expect to receive
emotions in return. That is the feeling of the predicate-type. What the
45-year-old woman lacks in emotions, _i.e._ in love in her marriage
relations she seeks to obtain in the outside world, and for that reason
she is an ardent participant in the Christian Science movement. If
the daughter imitates this situation she copies her mother, she seeks
to obtain emotions from the outside. But for a girl of sixteen such
an emotional state is, to say the least, quite dangerous; like her
mother, she reacts to her environment as a sufferer soliciting sympathy.
Such an emotional state is no longer dangerous in the mother, but for
obvious reasons it is quite dangerous in the daughter. Once freed from
her father and mother she will be like her mother, _i.e._ she will be
a suffering woman craving for inner gratification. She will thus be
exposed to the great danger of falling a victim to brutality and of
marrying a brute and inebriate like her father.

This conception is of importance in the consideration of the influence
of environment and education. The example shows what passes over from
the mother to the child. It is not the good and pious precepts, nor
is it any other inculcation of pedagogic truths that have a moulding
influence upon the character of the developing child, but what most
influences him is the peculiarly affective state which is totally
unknown to his parents and educators. The concealed discord between
the parents, the secret worry, the repressed hidden wishes, all these
produce in the individual a certain affective state with its objective
signs which slowly but surely, though unconsciously, works its way
into the child's mind, producing therein the same conditions and hence
the same reactions to external stimuli. We know the depressing effect
mournful and melancholic persons have upon us. A restless and nervous
individual infects his surroundings with unrest and dissatisfaction,
a grumbler with his discontent, etc. Since grown-up persons are so
sensitive to surrounding influences, we should certainly expect this
to be even more noticeable among children, whose minds are as soft and
plastic as wax. The father and mother impress deeply into the child's
mind the seal of their personality; the more sensitive and mouldable the
child the deeper is the impression. Thus things that are never even
spoken about are reflected in the child. The child imitates the gesture,
and just as the gesture of the parent is the expression of an emotional
state, so in turn the gesture gradually produces in the child a similar
feeling, as it feels itself, so to speak, into the gesture. Just as the
parents adapt themselves to the world, so does the child. At the age
of puberty when it begins to free itself from the spell of the family,
it enters into life with, so to say, a surface adaptation entirely in
keeping with that of the father and mother. The frequent and often very
deep _depressions of puberty_ emanate from this; they are symptoms which
are rooted in the difficulty of new adjustment. The youthful person at
first tries to separate himself as much as possible from his family; he
may even estrange himself from it, but inwardly this only ties him the
more firmly to the parental image. I cite the case of a young neurotic
who ran away from his parents; he was estranged from, and almost hostile
to them, but he admitted to me that he possessed a special sanctum; it
was a strong box containing his old childhood books, old dried flowers,
stones, and even small bottles of water from the well at his home and
from a river along which he walked with his parents, etc.

The first attempts to assume friendship and love are constellated in
the strongest manner possible by the relation to parents, and here one
can usually observe how powerful are the influences of the familiar
constellations. It is not rare, for instance, for a healthy man whose
mother was hysterical to marry a hysteric, or for the daughter of an
alcoholic to choose an alcoholic for her husband. I was once consulted
by an intelligent and educated young woman of twenty-six who suffered
from a peculiar symptom. She thought that her eyes now and then took
on a strange expression which exerted a disagreeable influence on men.
If she then looked at a man he became self-conscious, turned away and
said something rapidly to his neighbour, at which both were either
embarrassed or inclined to laugh. The patient was convinced that her
look excited indecent thoughts in the men. It was impossible to convince
her of the falsity of her conviction. This symptom immediately aroused
in me the suspicion that I dealt with a case of paranoia rather than
with a neurosis. But as was shown only three days later by the further
course of the treatment, I was mistaken, for the symptom promptly
disappeared after it had been explained by analysis. It originated
in the following manner: The lady had a lover who deserted her in a
very marked manner. She felt utterly forsaken; she withdrew from all
society and pleasure, and entertained suicidal ideas. In her seclusion
there accumulated unadmitted and repressed erotic wishes which she
unconsciously projected on men whenever she was in their company.
This gave rise to the conviction that her look excited erotic wishes
in men. Further investigation showed that her deserting lover was a
lunatic, which she had not apparently observed. I expressed my surprise
at her unsuitable choice, and added that she must have had a certain
predilection for loving mentally abnormal persons. This she denied,
stating that she had once before been engaged to be married to a normal
man. He, too, deserted her; and on further investigation it was found
that he, too, had been in an insane asylum shortly before,--another
lunatic! This seemed to me to confirm with sufficient certainty my
belief that she had an unconscious tendency to choose insane persons.
Whence originated this strange taste? Her father was an eccentric
character, and in later years entirely estranged from his family. Her
whole love had therefore been turned away from her father to a brother
eight years her senior; him she loved and honoured as a father, and
this brother became hopelessly insane at the age of fourteen. That was
apparently the model from which the patient could never free herself,
after which she chose her lovers, and through which she had to become
unhappy. Her neurosis which gave the impression of insanity, probably
originated from this infantile model. We must take into consideration
that we are dealing in this case with a highly educated and intelligent
lady, who did not pass carelessly over her mental experiences, who
indeed reflected much over her unhappiness, without, however, having any
idea whence her misfortune originated.

There are things which unconsciously appear to us as a matter of course,
and it is for this reason that we do not see them truly, but attribute
everything to the so-called congenital character. I could cite any
number of examples of this kind. Every patient furnishes contributions
to this subject of the determination of destiny through the influence of
the familiar milieu. In every neurotic we see how the constellation of
the infantile milieu influences not only the character of the neurosis,
but also life's destiny, even in its minute details. The unhappy choice
of a profession, and innumerable matrimonial failures can be traced
to this constellation. There are, however, cases where the profession
has been well chosen, where the husband or wife leaves nothing to
be desired, and where still the person does not feel well but works
and lives under constant difficulties. Such cases often appear under
the guise of chronic neurasthenia. Here the difficulty is due to the
fact that the mind is unconsciously split into two parts of divergent
tendencies which are impeding each other; one part lives with the
husband or with the profession, while the other lives unconsciously in
the past with the father or mother. I have treated a lady who, after
suffering many years from a severe neurosis, merged into a dementia
præcox. The neurotic affection began with her marriage. This lady's
husband was kind, educated, well to do, and in every respect suitable
for her; his character showed nothing that would in any way interfere
with a happy marriage. The marriage was nevertheless unhappy, all
congenial companionship being excluded because the wife was neurotic.

The important heuristic axiom of every psychoanalysis reads as
follows: _If a person develops a neurosis this neurosis contains the
counter-argument against the relation of the patient to the individual
with whom he is most intimately connected._ A neurosis in the husband
loudly proclaims that he has intensive resistances and contrary
tendencies against his wife; if the wife has a neurosis she has a
tendency which diverges from her husband. If the person is unmarried
the neurosis is then directed against the lover or the sweetheart or
against the parents. Every neurotic naturally strives against this
relentless formulation of the content of his neurosis, and he often
refuses to recognise it at any cost, but still it is always justified.
To be sure, the conflict is not on the surface, but must generally be
revealed through a painstaking psychoanalysis.

The history of our patient reads as follows:

The father had a powerful personality. She was his favourite daughter,
and entertained for him a boundless veneration. At the age of seventeen
she for the first time fell in love with a young man. At that time she
twice dreamt the same dream, the impression of which never left her in
all her later years; she even imputed a mystic significance to it, and
often recalled it with religious dread. In the dream she saw a tall,
masculine figure with a very beautiful white beard; at this sight she
was permeated with a feeling of awe and delight as if she experienced
the presence of God Himself. This dream made the deepest impression
on her, and she was constrained to think of it again and again. The
love affair of that period proved to be one of little warmth, and was
soon given up. Later the patient married her present husband. Though
she loved her husband she was led continually to compare him with her
deceased father; this comparison always proved unfavourable to her
husband. Whatever the husband said, intended, or did, was subjected
to this standard and always with the same result: "My father would
have done all this better and differently." Our patient's life with
her husband was not happy, she could neither respect nor love him
sufficiently; she was inwardly dissatisfied. She gradually developed
a fervent piety, and at the same time violent hysterical symptoms
supervened. She began by going into raptures now over this and now over
that clergyman; she was looking everywhere for a spiritual friend, and
estranged herself more and more from her husband. The mental trouble
manifested itself about ten years after marriage. In her diseased state
she refused to have anything to do with her husband and child; she
imagined herself pregnant by another man. In brief, the resistances
against her husband, which hitherto had been laboriously repressed,
came out quite openly, and among other things manifested themselves in
insults of the gravest kind directed against him.

In this case we see how a neurosis appeared, as it were, at the moment
of marriage, _i.e. this neurosis expresses the counter-argument against
the husband_. What is the counter-argument? The counter-argument is
the father of the patient, for she verified her belief daily that her
husband was not the equal of her father. When the patient first fell in
love there had appeared a symptom in the form of an extremely impressive
dream or vision. She saw the man with the very beautiful white beard.
Who was this man? On directing her attention to the beautiful white
beard she immediately recognised the phantom. It was of course her
father. Thus every time the patient merged into a love affair the
picture of her father inopportunely appeared and prevented her from
adjusting herself psychologically to her husband.

I purposely chose this case as an illustration because it is simple,
obvious, and quite typical of many marriages which are crippled through
the neurosis of the wife. The cause of the unhappiness always lies in a
too firm attachment to the parents. The infantile relationship has not
been given up. We find here one of the most important tasks of pedagogy,
namely, the solution of the problem how to free the growing individual
from his unconscious attachments to the influences of the infantile
milieu, in such a manner that he may retain whatever there is in it that
is suitable and reject whatever is unsuitable. To solve this difficult
question on the part of the child seems to me impossible at present. We
know as yet too little about the child's emotional processes. The first
and only real contribution to the literature on this subject has in fact
appeared during the present year. It is the analysis of a five-year-old
boy published by Freud.

The difficulties on the part of the child are very great. They should
not, however, be so great on the part of the parents. In many ways
the parents could manage the love of children more carefully, more
indulgently, and more intelligently. The sins committed against
favourite children by the undue love of the parents could perhaps be
avoided through a wider knowledge of the child's mind. For many reasons
I find it impossible to say anything of general validity concerning the
bringing up of children as it is affected by this problem. We are as yet
very far from general prescriptions and rules; indeed we are still in
the realm of casuistry. Unfortunately, our knowledge of the finer mental
processes in the child is so meagre that we are not yet in any position
to say where the greatest trouble lies, whether in the parents, in the
child, or in the conception of the milieu. Only psychoanalyses of the
kind that Professor Freud has published in the _Jahrbuch_, 1909,[141]
will help us out of this difficulty. Such comprehensive and profound
observations should act as a strong inducement to all teachers to occupy
themselves with Freud's psychology. This psychology offers more values
for practical pedagogy than the physiological psychology of the present.


LECTURE III

EXPERIENCES CONCERNING THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF THE CHILD[142]

Ladies and Gentlemen: In our last lecture we saw how important the
emotional processes of childhood are for later life. In to-day's lecture
I should like to give you some insight into the psychic life of the
child through the analysis of a four-year-old girl. It is much to be
regretted that there are few among you who have had the opportunity
of reading the analysis of "Little Hans" (_Kleiner Hans_), which was
published by Freud during the current year.[143] I ought to begin by
giving you the content of that analysis, so that you might be in a
position to compare Freud's results with those obtained by me, and
observe the marked, and astonishing similarity between the unconscious
creations of the two children. Without a knowledge of the fundamental
analysis of Freud, much in the report of the following case will
appear strange, incomprehensible, and perhaps unacceptable to you. I
beg you, however, to defer your final judgment and to enter upon the
consideration of these new subjects with a kindly disposition, for such
pioneer work in virgin soil requires not only the greatest patience on
the part of the investigator, but also the unprejudiced attention of
his audience. Because the Freudian investigations apparently involve a
discussion of the most intimate secrets of sexuality many people have
had a feeling of repulsion against them, and have therefore rejected
everything as a matter of course without any real disproof. This,
unfortunately, has almost always been the fate of Freud's doctrines up
to the present. One must not come to the consideration of these matters
with the firm conviction that they do not exist, for it may easily
happen that for the prejudiced they really do not exist. One should
perhaps assume the author's point of view for the moment and investigate
these phenomena under his guidance. Only in this way can the correctness
or otherwise of our observations be affirmed. We may err, as all human
beings err. But the continual holding up to us of our mistakes--perhaps
they are worse than mistakes--does not help us to see things more
distinctly. We should prefer to see _wherein_ we err. That should be
demonstrated to us in our own sphere of experience. Thus far, however,
no one has succeeded in meeting us on our own ground, nor in giving us a
different conception of the things which we ourselves see. We still have
to complain that our critics persist in maintaining complete ignorance
about the matters in question. The only reason for this is that they
have never taken the trouble to become thoroughly acquainted with our
method; had they done this they would have understood us.

The little girl to whose sagacity and intellectual vivacity we are
indebted for the following observations is a healthy, lively child of
emotional temperament. She has never been seriously ill, and never,
even in the realm of the nervous system, had there been observed any
symptoms prior to this investigation. In the report which follows we
shall have to waive any connected description, for it is made up of
anecdotes which treat of one experience out of a whole cycle of similar
ones, and which cannot, therefore, be arranged scientifically and
systematically, but must rather be described somewhat in the form of a
story. We cannot as yet dispense with this manner of description in our
analytical psychology, for we are still far from being able in all cases
to separate with unerring certainty what is curious from what is typical.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the little daughter, whom we will call Anna, was about three years
old, she once had the following conversation with her grandmother:

Anna: "Grandma, why are your eyes so dim?"

Grandma: "Because I am old."

A.: "But you will become young again."

G.: "No, do you know, I shall become older and older, and then I shall
die."

A.: "Well, and then?"

G.: "Then I shall be an angel."

A.: "And then will you be a little baby again?"

The child found here a welcome opportunity for the provisional solution
of a problem. For some time before she had been in the habit of asking
her mother whether she would ever have a living doll, a little child, a
little brother. This naturally included the question as to the origin of
children. As such questions appeared only spontaneously and indirectly,
the parents attached no significance to them, but responded to them
as lightly and in appearance as carelessly as the child seemed to ask
them. Thus she once received from her father the pretty story that
children are brought by the stork. Anna had already heard somewhere a
more serious version, namely, that children, are little angels living
in heaven, and are brought from heaven by the stork. This theory seems
to have become the starting point for the investigating activity of the
little one. From the conversation with the grandmother it could be seen
that this theory was capable of wide application, namely, it not only
solved in a comforting manner the painful idea of parting and dying,
but at the same time also the riddle of the origin of children. Such
solutions which kill at least two birds with one stone were formerly
tenaciously adhered to in science, and cannot be removed from the mind
of the child without a certain amount of shock.

Just as the birth of a little sister was the turning point in the
history of "Little Hans," so in this case it was the birth of a
brother, which happened when Anna had reached the age of four years.
The pregnancy of the mother apparently remained unnoticed; _i.e._ the
child never expressed herself on this subject. On the evening before the
birth, when labour pains were beginning, the child was in her father's
room. He took her on his knee and said, "Tell me, what would you say
if you should get a little brother to-night?" "I would kill him" was
the prompt answer. The expression "to kill" looks very serious, but
in reality it is quite harmless, for "to kill" and "to die" in child
language signify only to remove, either in the active or in the passive
sense, as has already been pointed out a number of times by Freud.
"To kill" as used by the child is a harmless word, especially so when
we know that the child uses the word "kill" quite promiscuously for
all possible kinds of destruction, removal, demolition, etc. It is,
nevertheless, worth while to note this tendency (see the analysis of
_Kleiner Hans_, p. 5).

The birth occurred early in the morning, and later the father entered
the room where Anna slept. She awoke as he came in. He imparted to her
the news of the advent of a little brother, which she took with surprise
and strained facial expression. The father took her in his arms and
carried her into the lying-in room. She first threw a rapid glance at
her somewhat pale mother and then displayed something like a mixture of
embarrassment and suspicion as if thinking, "Now what else is going to
happen?" (Father's impression.) She displayed hardly any pleasure at the
sight of the new arrival, so that the cool reception she gave it caused
general disappointment. During the forenoon she kept very noticeably
away from her mother; this was the more striking as she was usually
much attached to her. But once when her mother was alone she ran into
the room, embraced her and said, "Well, aren't you going to die now?"
Now a part of the conflict in the child's psyche is revealed to us.
Though the stork theory was never really taken seriously, she accepted
the fruitful re-birth hypothesis, according to which a person by dying
helps a child into life. Accordingly the mother, too, must die; why,
then, should the newborn child, against whom she already felt childish
jealousy, cause her pleasure? It was for this reason that she had to
seek a favourable opportunity of reassuring herself as to whether the
mother was to die, or rather was moved to express the hope that she
would not die.

With this happy issue, however, the re-birth theory sustained a severe
shock. How was it possible now to explain the birth of her little
brother and the origin of children in general? There still remained the
stork theory which, though never expressly rejected, had been implicitly
waived through the assumption of the re-birth theory. The explanations
next attempted unfortunately remained hidden from the parents as the
child went to stay with her grandmother for a few weeks. From the
latter's report the stork theory was often discussed, and was naturally
reinforced by the concurrence of those about her.

When Anna returned to her parents, she again, on meeting her mother,
evinced the same mixture of embarrassment and suspicion which she had
displayed after the birth. The impression, though inexplicable, was
quite unmistakable to both parents. Her behaviour towards the baby was
very nice. During her absence a nurse had come into the house who, on
account of her uniform, made a deep impression on Anna; to be sure, the
impression at first was quite unfavourable as she evinced the greatest
hostility to her. Thus nothing could induce her to allow herself to
be undressed and put to sleep by this nurse. Whence this resistance
originated was soon shown in an angry scene near the cradle of the
little brother in which Anna shouted at the nurse, "This is not your
little brother, he is mine!" Gradually, however, she became reconciled
to the nurse, and began to play nurse herself; she had to have her white
cap and apron, and "nursed" now her little brother, and now her doll.

In contrast to her former mood she became unmistakably mournful and
dreamy. She often sat for a long time under the table singing stories
and making rhymes, which were partially incomprehensible but sometimes
contained the "nurse" theme ("I am a nurse of the green cross"). Some of
the stories, however, distinctly showed a painful feeling striving for
expression.

Here we meet with a new and important feature in the little one's life:
that is, we meet with reveries, even a tendency towards poetic fancies
and melancholic attacks. All of them things which we are wont first
to encounter at a later period of life, at a time when the youth or
maiden is preparing to sever the family tie and to enter independently
upon life, but is still held back by an inward, painful feeling of
homesickness for the warmth of the parental hearth. At such a time the
youth begins to replace what is lacking with poetic fancies in order
to compensate for the deficiency. To approximate the psychology of a
four-year-old child to that of the youth approaching puberty will at
first sight seem paradoxical; the relationship lies, however, not in the
age but rather in the mechanism. The elegiac reveries express the fact
that a part of that love which formerly belonged, and should belong,
to a real object, is now _introverted_, that is, it is turned inward
into the subject and there produces an increased imaginative activity.
What is the origin of this _introversion_? Is it a psychological
manifestation peculiar to this age, or does it owe its origin to a
conflict?

This is explained in the following occurrence. It often happened that
Anna was disobedient to her mother, she was insolent, saying, "I am
going back to grandma."

Mother: "But I shall be sad when you leave me."

Anna: "Oh, but you have my little brother."

This reaction towards the mother shows what the little one was really
aiming at with her threats to go away again; she apparently wished to
hear what her mother would say to her proposal, that is, to see what
attitude her mother would actually assume to her, whether her little
brother had not ousted her altogether from her mother's regard. One
must, however, give no credence to this little trickster. For the child
could readily see and feel that, despite the existence of the little
brother, there was nothing essentially lacking to her in her mother's
love. The reproach to which she subjects her mother is therefore
unjustified, and to the trained ear this is betrayed by a slightly
affected tone. Such an unmistakable tone does not expect to be taken
seriously and hence it obtrudes itself more vehemently. The reproach
as such cannot be taken seriously by the mother, for it was only the
forerunner of other and this time more serious resistances. Not long
after the conversation narrated above, the following scene took place:

Mother: "Come, we are going into the garden now!"

Anna: "You are telling lies, take care if you are not telling the truth."

M.: "What are you thinking of? I _am_ telling the truth."

A.: "No, you are not telling the truth."

M.: "You will soon see that I am telling the truth: we are going into
the garden now."

A.: "Indeed, is that true? Is that really true? Are you not lying?"

Scenes of this kind were repeated a number of times. This time the
tone was more rude and more vehement, and at the same time the accent
on the word "lie" betrayed something special which the parents did not
understand; indeed, at first they attributed too little significance to
the spontaneous utterances of the child. In this they merely did what
education usually does in general, _ex officio_. We usually pay little
heed to children in every stage of life; in all essential matters, they
are treated as not responsible, and in all unessential matters, they are
trained with an automatic precision.

Under resistances there always lies a question, a conflict, of which we
hear later and on other occasions. But usually one forgets to connect
the thing heard with the resistances. Thus, on another occasion, Anna
put to her mother the following questions:--

Anna: "I should like to become a nurse when I grow big--why did you not
become a nurse?"

Mother: "Why, as I have become a mother I have children to nurse anyway."

A. (Reflecting): "Indeed, shall I be a lady like you, and shall I talk
to you then?"

The mother's answer again shows whither the child's question was really
directed. Apparently Anna, too, would like to have a child to "nurse"
just as the nurse has. Where the nurse got the little child is quite
clear. Anna, too, could get a child in the same way if she were big.
Why did not the mother become such a nurse, that is to say, how did
she get a child if not in the same way as the nurse? Like the nurse,
Anna, too, could get a child, but how that fact might be changed in
the future or how she might come to resemble her mother in the matter
of getting children is not clear to her. From this resulted the
thoughtful question, "Indeed, shall I be a lady like you? Shall I be
quite different?" The stork theory evidently had come to naught, the
dying theory met a similar fate; hence she now thinks one may get a
child in the same way, as, for example, the nurse got hers. She, too,
could get one in this natural way, but how about the mother who is no
nurse and still has children? Looking at the matter from this point of
view, Anna asks: "Why did you not become a nurse?" namely, "why have
you not got your child in the natural way?" This peculiar indirect
manner of questioning is typical, and evidently corresponds with the
child's hazy grasp of the problem, unless we assume a certain diplomatic
uncertainty prompted by a desire to evade direct questioning. We shall
later find an illustration of this possibility. Anna is evidently
confronted with the question "Where does the child come from?" The
stork did not bring it; mother did not die; nor did mother get it in
the same way as the nurse. She has, however, asked this question before
and received the information from her father that the stork brings
children; this is positively untrue, she can never be deceived on
this point. Accordingly, papa and mama and all the others lie. This
readily explains her suspicion at the childbirth and her discrediting
of her mother. But it also explains another point, namely, the elegiac
reveries which we have attributed to a partial introversion. We know
now what was the real object from which love was removed and uselessly
introverted, namely, it had to be taken _from the parents_ who deceived
her and refused to tell her the truth. (What can this be which must not
be uttered? What is going on here?) Such were the parenthetic questions
of the child, and the answer was: Evidently this must be something to
be concealed, perhaps something dangerous. Attempts to make her talk
and to draw out the truth by means of artful questions were futile,
so _resistance is placed against resistance_, and the introversion
of love begins. It is evident that the capacity for sublimation in a
four-year-old child is still too slightly developed to be capable of
performing more than symptomatic services. The mind, therefore, depends
on another compensation, namely, it resorts to one of the relinquished
infantile devices for securing love by force, preferably that of crying
and calling the mother at night. This had been diligently practised
and exhausted during her first year. It now returns, and corresponding
to the period of life has become well determined and equipped with
recent impressions. It was just after the earthquakes in Messina, and
this event was discussed at the table. Anna was extremely interested
in everything, she repeatedly asked her grandmother to tell her how
the earth shook, how the houses fell in and many people lost their
lives. After this she had nocturnal fears, she could not be alone, her
mother had to go to her and stay with her; otherwise she feared that an
earthquake would happen, that the house would fall and kill her. During
the day, too, she was much occupied with such thoughts. While walking
with her mother she annoyed her with such questions as, "Will the house
be standing when we return home? Are you sure there is no earthquake at
home? Will papa still be living?" About every stone lying in the road
she asked whether it was from an earthquake. A building in course of
erection was a house destroyed by the earthquake, etc. Finally, she
began to cry out frequently at night that the earthquake was coming and
that she heard the thunder. Each evening she had to be solemnly assured
that there was no earthquake coming.

Many means of calming her were tried, thus she was told, for example,
that earthquakes only occur where there are volcanoes. But then she
had to be satisfied that the mountains surrounding the city were not
volcanoes. This reasoning led the child by degrees to a desire for
learning, as strong as it was unnatural at her age, which showed itself
in a demand that all the geological atlases and text-books should be
brought to her from her father's library. For hours she rummaged through
these works looking for pictures of volcanoes and earthquakes, and
asking questions continually. Here we are confronted by an energetic
effort to sublimate the fear into an eager desire for knowledge,
which at this age made a decidedly premature exaction. But how many
a gifted child suffering in exactly the same way with such problems,
is "cosseted" through this untimely sublimation, by no means to its
advantage. For, by favouring sublimation at this age one is merely
strengthening manifestation of neurosis. The root of the eager desire
for knowledge is _fear_, and _fear is the expression of converted
libido_; that is, it is the expression of _an introversion which has
become neurotic_, which at this age is neither necessary nor favourable
for the development of the child.

Whither this eager desire for knowledge was ultimately directed is
explained by a series of questions which arose almost daily. "Why is
Sophie (a younger sister) younger than I?" "Where was Freddie (the
little brother) before? Was he in heaven? What was he doing there? Why
did he come down just now, why not before?"

This state of affairs led the father to decide that the mother should
tell the child when occasion offered _the truth concerning the origin
of the little brother_. This having been done, Anna soon thereafter
asked about the stork. Her mother told her that the story of the stork
was not true, but that Freddie grew inside his mother like the flowers
in a plant. At first he was very little, and then he became bigger and
bigger as a plant does. She listened attentively without the slightest
surprise, and then asked, "But did he come out all by himself?"

Mother: "Yes."

Anna: "But he cannot walk!"

Sophie: "Then he crawled out."

Anna, overhearing her little sister's answer: "Is there a hole here?
(pointing to the breast) or did he come out of the mouth? Who came
out of the nurse?" She then interrupted herself and exclaimed, "No,
no, the stork brought baby brother down from heaven." She soon left
the subject and again wished to see pictures of volcanoes. During the
evening following this conversation she was calm. The sudden explanation
produced in the child a whole series of ideas, which manifested
themselves in certain questions. New unexpected perspectives were
opened; she rapidly approached the main problem, namely, the question,
"_Where did the baby come out?_" _Was it from a hole in the breast
or from the mouth?_ Both suppositions are entirely qualified to form
acceptable theories. We even meet with recently married women who
still entertain the theory of the hole in the abdominal wall or of the
Cæsarean section; this is supposed to betray a very unusual degree of
innocence. But as a matter of fact it is not innocence; we are always
dealing in such cases with infantile sexual activities, which in later
life have brought the _vias naturales_ into ill repute.

It may be asked where the child got the absurd idea that there is a
hole in the breast, or that the birth takes place through the mouth.
Why did she not select one of the natural openings existing in the
pelvis from which things come out daily? The explanation is simple. Very
shortly before, our little one had invoked some educational criticism
from her mother by a heightened interest in both openings with their
remarkable excretions,--an interest not always in accord with the
requirements of cleanliness and decorum. Then for the first time she
became acquainted with the exceptional laws relating to these bodily
regions and, being a sensitive child, she soon learned that there was
something here to be tabooed. This region, therefore, must not be
referred to. Anna had simply shown herself docile and had so adjusted
herself to the cultural demands that she thought (at least spoke) of the
simplest things last. The incorrect theories substituted for correct
laws sometimes persist for years until brusque explanations come from
without. It is, therefore, no wonder that such theories, the forming of
and adherence to which are favoured even by parents and educationalists
should later become determinants for important symptoms in a neurosis,
or of delusions in a psychosis, just as I have shown that in dementia
præcox[144] what has existed in the mind for years always remains
somewhere, though it may be hidden under compensations of a seemingly
different kind.

But even before this question was settled as to where the child really
comes out a new problem obtruded itself, viz. the children came out
of the mother, but how is it with the nurse? Did some one come out of
her too? This question was followed by the remark, "No, no, the stork
brought down baby brother from heaven." What is there peculiar about the
fact that nobody came out of the nurse? We recall that Anna identified
herself with the nurse, and planned to become a nurse later, for she,
too, would like to have a child, and she could have one as well as the
nurse. But now when it is known that the little brother grew in mama,
how is it now?

This disquieting question is averted by a quick return to the
stork-angel theory which has never been really believed and which after
a few trials is at last definitely abandoned. Two questions, however,
remain in the air. The first reads as follows: Where does the child come
out? The second, a considerably more difficult one, reads: How does it
happen that mama has children while the nurse and the servants do not?
All these questions did not at first manifest themselves.

On the day following the explanation, while at dinner, Anna
spontaneously remarked: "My brother is in Italy, and has a house of
cloth and glass, but it does not tumble down."

In this case, as in the others, it was impossible to ask for an
explanation; the resistances were too great and Anna could not be drawn
into conversation. This former officious and pretty explanation is very
significant. For some three months the two sisters had been building
a stereotyped fanciful conception of a "big brother." This brother
knows everything, he can do and has everything, he has been and is in
every place where the children are not; he is owner of great cows,
oxen, horses, dogs; everything is his, etc. Every one has such a "big
brother." We must not look far for the origin of this fancy; the model
for it is the _father_ who seems to correspond to this conception;
he seems to be like a brother to mama. The children, too, have their
similar powerful "brother." This brother is very brave; he is at present
in dangerous Italy and inhabits an impossible fragile house, and _it
does not tumble down_. For the child this realises an important wish:
_the earthquake is no longer to be dangerous_; in consequence _the
child's fear disappeared and did not return_. The fear of earthquakes
now entirely vanished. Instead of calling her father to her bed to
conjure away the fear, she now became very affectionate and begged him
every night to kiss her.

In order to test this new state of affairs the father showed her
pictures illustrating volcanoes and earthquake devastations. Anna
remained unaffected, she examined the pictures with indifference,
remarking, "These people are dead; I have already seen that quite
often." The picture of a volcanic eruption no longer had any attraction
for her. Thus all her scientific interest collapsed and vanished as
suddenly as it came. During the days following the explanation Anna had
quite important matters to occupy herself with; she disseminated her
newly acquired knowledge among those about her in the following manner:
She began by again circumstantially affirming what had been told her,
viz. that Freddy, her younger sister, and herself had grown in her
mother, that papa and mama grew in their mothers, and that the servants
likewise grew in their respective mothers. By frequent questions she
tested the true basis of her knowledge, for her suspicion was aroused in
no small measure, so that it needed many confirmations to remove all her
uncertainties.

On one occasion the trustworthiness of the theory threatened to go
to pieces. About a week after the explanation, the father was taken
ill with influenza and had to remain in bed during the forenoon. The
children knew nothing about this, and Anna, coming into the parents'
bedroom, saw what was quite unusual, namely, that her father was
remaining in bed. She again took on a peculiar surprised expression; she
remained at a distance from the bed and would not come nearer; she was
apparently again reserved and suspicious. But suddenly she burst out
with the question, "Why are you in bed; have you a plant in your inside
too?"

The father naturally had to laugh. He calmed her, however, by assuring
her that children never grow in the father, that only women can have
children, and not men; thereupon the child again became friendly. But
though the surface was calm the problems continued to work in the dark.
A few days later, while at dinner, Anna related the following dream:
"I dreamed last night of Noah's ark." The father then asked her what
she had dreamed about it, but Anna's answer was sheer nonsense. In such
cases it is necessary only to wait and pay attention. A few minutes
later she said to her mother, "I dreamed last night about Noah's ark,
and there were a lot of little animals in it." Another pause. She then
began her story for the third time. "_I dreamed last night about Noah's
ark, and there were a lot of baby animals in it, and underneath there
was a lid and that opened and all the baby animals fell out._"

The children really had a Noah's ark, but its opening, a lid, was on the
roof and not underneath. In this way she delicately intimated that the
story of the birth from mouth or breast is incorrect, and that she had
some inkling where the children came out.

A few weeks then passed without any noteworthy occurrences. On one
occasion she related the following dream: "_I dreamed about papa and
mama; they had been sitting late in the study, and we children were
there too._" On the face of this we find a wish of the children to be
allowed to sit up as long as the parents. This wish is here realised,
or rather it is utilised to express a more important wish, namely, _to
be present in the evening when the parents are alone_; of course, quite
innocently, it was in the _study_ where she has seen all the interesting
books, and where she has satiated her thirst for knowledge; _i.e._ she
was really seeking an answer to the burning question, whence the little
brother came. If the children were there they would find out.[145] A
few days later Anna had a terrifying dream from which she awoke crying,
"The earthquake is coming, the house has begun to shake." Her mother
went to her and calmed her by saying that the earthquake was not coming,
that everything was quiet, and that everybody was asleep. Whereupon Anna
said: "_I would like to see the spring, when all the little flowers are
coming out and the whole lawn is full of flowers; I would like to see
Freddy, he has such a dear little face. What is papa doing? What is he
saying?_" The mother said, "He is asleep, and isn't saying anything
now." Little Anna then remarked with a sarcastic smile: "_He will surely
be sick again to-morrow._"

This text should be read backwards. The last sentence was not meant
seriously, as it was uttered in a mocking tone. When the father was sick
the last time, Anna suspected that he had a "plant in his inside." The
sarcasm signifies: "To-morrow papa is surely going to have a child." But
this also is not meant seriously. Papa is not going to have a child;
mama alone has children; perhaps she will have another child to-morrow;
but where from? "What does papa do?" The formulation of the difficult
problem seems here to come to the surface. It reads: What does papa
really do if he does not bear children? The little one is very anxious
to have a solution for all these problems; she would like to know how
Freddy came into the world, she would like to see how the little flowers
come out of the earth in the spring, and these wishes are hidden behind
the fear of earthquakes.

After this intermezzo Anna slept quietly until morning. In the morning
her mother asked her what she had dreamed. She did not at first recall
anything, and then said: "_I dreamed that I could make the summer, and
then some one threw a Punch_[146] _down into the closet._"

This peculiar dream apparently has two different scenes which are
separated by "then." The second part draws its material from the recent
wish to possess a Punch, that is, to have a boy doll just as mama has
a little boy. Some one threw Punch down into the closet; one often
lets other things fall down into the water closet. _It is just like
this that the children, too, come out._ We have here an analogy to the
"Lumpf-theory" of little Hans.[147] Whenever several scenes are found
in one dream, each scene ordinarily represents a particular variation
of the complex elaboration. Here accordingly the first part is only a
variation of the theme found in the second part. The meaning of "to see
the spring" or "to see the little flowers come out" we have already
remarked. Anna now dreams that she _can make the summer_, that is she
can bring it about that the little flowers shall come out. She herself
can make a little child, and the second part of the dream represents
this just as one makes a motion in the w.c. Here we find the egoistic
wish which is behind the seemingly objective interest of the previous
night's conversation.

A few days later the mother was visited by a lady who expected soon to
become a mother. The children seemed to take no interest in the matter,
but the next day they amused themselves with the following play which
was directed by the elder girl; they took all the newspapers they
could find in their father's paper-basket and stuffed them under their
clothes, so that the imitation was unmistakable. During the night little
Anna had another dream: "_I dreamed about a woman in the city; she had
a very big stomach._" The chief actor in a dream is always the dreamer
himself under some definite aspect; thus the childish play of the day
before is fully solved.

Not long after, Anna surprised her mother with the following
performance: She stuck her doll under her clothes, then pulled it out
slowly head downwards, and at the same time remarked, "_Look, the baby
is coming out, now it is all out._" By this means Anna tells her mother,
"You see, thus I apprehend the problem of birth. What do you think of
it? Is that right?" The play is really meant to be a question, for,
as we shall see later, this idea had to be officially confirmed. That
rumination on this problem by no means ended here, is shown by the
occasional ideas conceived during the following weeks. Thus she repeated
the same play a few days later with her Teddy Bear, who stands in the
relation of an especially beloved doll. One day, looking at a rose,
she said to her grandmother, "See, the rose is getting a baby." As her
grandmother did not quite understand her, she pointed to the enlarged
calyx and said, "Don't you see it is quite fat here?"

Anna once quarrelled with her younger sister, and the latter exclaimed
angrily, "I will kill you." Whereupon Anna answered, "When I am dead you
will be all alone; then you will have to pray to God for a live baby."
But the scene soon changed: Anna was the angel, and the younger sister
was forced to kneel before her and pray to her that she should present
to her a living child. In this way Anna became the child-dispensing
mother.

Oranges were once served at table. Anna impatiently asked for one and
said, "_I am going to take an orange and swallow it all down into my
stomach, and then I shall get a baby._" Who does not think here of
fairy tales in which childless women become pregnant by swallowing
fruit, fish, and similar things?[148] In this way Anna sought to solve
the problem _how the children actually come into the mother_. She thus
enters into a formulation which hitherto had not been defined with
so much clearness. The solution follows in the form of an _analogy_,
which is quite characteristic of the archaic thinking of the child.
(In the adult, too, there is a kind of thinking by metaphor which
belongs to the stratum lying immediately below consciousness; dreams
bring the analogies to the surface; the same may be observed also in
dementia præcox.) In German as well as in numerous foreign fairy tales
one frequently finds such characteristic childish comparisons. Fairy
tales seem to be the myths of the child, and therefore contain among
other things the mythology which the child weaves concerning the sexual
processes. The spell of the fairy tale poetry, which is felt even by
the adult, is explained by the fact that some of the old theories
are still alive in our unconscious minds. We experience a strange,
peculiar and familiar feeling when a conception of our remotest youth
is again stimulated. Without becoming conscious it merely sends into
consciousness a feeble copy of its original emotional strength.

The problem how the child gets into the mother was difficult to solve.
As the only way of taking things into the body is through the mouth, it
could evidently be assumed that the mother ate something like a fruit,
which then grows inside her. But then comes another difficulty, namely,
it is clear enough what the mother produces, but it is not yet clear
what the father is good for.

What does the father do? Anna now occupied herself exclusively with this
question. One morning she ran into the parents' bedroom while they were
dressing, she jumped into her father's bed, lay face downwards, kicked
with her legs and called at the same time, "_Look! does papa do that?_"
The analogy to the horse of "little Hans" which raised such disturbance
with its legs, is very surprising.

With this last performance the problem seemed to be at rest entirely,
at least the parents found no opportunity to make any pertinent
observations. That the problem should come to a standstill just here
is not at all surprising, for this is really its most difficult part.
Moreover, we know from experience that not many children go beyond
these limits during the period of childhood. The problem is almost
too difficult for the childish mind, which still lacks much knowledge
necessary to its solution.

This standstill lasted about five months, during which no phobias or
other signs of complex-elaboration appeared. After this lapse of time
there appeared premonitory signs of some new incidents. Anna's family
lived at that time in the country near a lake where the mother and
children could bathe. As Anna was afraid to wade farther into the water
than knee-deep, her father once put her into the water, which led to
an outburst of crying. In the evening while going to bed Anna asked
her mother, "Do you not believe that father wanted to drown me?" A few
days later there was another outburst of crying. She continued to stand
in the gardener's way until he finally placed her in a newly dug hole.
Anna cried bitterly, and afterwards maintained that the gardener wished
to bury her. Finally she awoke during the night with fearful crying.
Her mother went to her in the adjoining room and quieted her. She had
dreamed that "a train passed and then fell in a heap."

This tallies with the "stage coach" of "little Hans." These incidents
showed clearly enough that fear was again in the air, _i.e._ that a
resistance had again arisen preventing transference to the parents,
and that therefore a great part of her love was converted into fear.
This time suspicion was not directed against the mother, but against
the father, who she was sure must know the secret, but would never
let anything out. What could the father be doing or keeping secret?
To the child this secret appeared as something dangerous, so that she
felt the worst might be expected from the father. (This feeling of
childish anxiety with the father as object we see again most distinctly
in adults, especially in dementia præcox, which lifts the veil of
obscurity from many unconscious processes, as though it were following
psychoanalytic principles.) It was for this reason that Anna came to
the apparently absurd conclusion that her father wanted to drown her.
At the same time her fear contained the thought that the _object of the
father had some relation to a dangerous action_. This stream of thought
is no arbitrary interpretation. Anna meanwhile grew a little older and
her interest in her father took on a special colouring which is hard to
describe. Language has no words to describe the quite unique kind of
tender curiosity which shone in the child's eyes.

Anna once took marked delight in assisting the gardener while he was
sowing grass, without apparently divulging the profound significance
of her play. About a fortnight later she began to observe with great
pleasure the young grass sprouting. On one of these occasions she asked
her mother the following question: "Tell me, how did the eyes grow into
the head?" The mother told her that she did not know. Anna, however,
continued to ask whether God or her papa could tell this? The mother
then referred her to her father, who might tell her how the eyes grew
into the head. A few days later there was a family reunion at tea. When
the guests had departed, the father remained at the table reading the
paper and Anna also remained. Suddenly approaching her father she said,
"Tell me, how did the eyes grow into the head?"

Father: "They did not grow into the head; they were there from the
beginning and grew with the head."

A.: "Were not the eyes planted?"

F.: "No, they grew in the head like the nose."

A.: "Did the mouth and the ears grow in the same way? and the hair, too?"

F.: "Yes, they all grew in the same way."

A.: "And the hair, too? But the mousies came into the world naked. Where
was the hair before? Aren't there little seeds for it?"

F.: "No; you see, the hair really came out of little grains which are
like seeds, but these were already in the skin long before and nobody
sowed them." The father was now getting concerned; he knew whither the
little one's thoughts were directed, but he did not wish to overthrow,
for the sake of a former false application, the opportunely established
seed-theory which she had most fortunately gathered from nature; but the
child spoke with an unwonted seriousness which demanded consideration.

Anna (evidently disappointed, and in a distressed tone): "But how did
Freddy get into mama? Who stuck him in? and who stuck you into your
mama? Where did he come out from?"

From this sudden storm of questions the father chose the last for
his first answer. "Just think, you know well enough that Freddy is a
boy; boys become men and girls women. Only women and not men can have
children; now just think, where could Freddy come out from?"

A. (Laughs joyfully and points to her genitals): "Did he come out here?"

Father: "Yes, of course, you certainly must have thought of this before?"

A. (Overlooking the question): "But how did Freddy get into mama? Did
anybody plant him? Was the seed planted?"

This very precise question could no longer be evaded by the father.
He explained to the child, who listened with the greatest attention,
that the mother is like the soil and the father like the gardener; that
the father provides the seed which grows in the mother, and thus gives
origin to a baby. This answer gave extraordinary satisfaction; she
immediately ran to her mother and said, "Papa has told me everything,
now I know it all." She did not, however, tell what she knew.

The new knowledge was, however, put into play the following day. Anna
went to her mother and said, "Think, mama, papa told me how Freddy was
a little angel and was brought from heaven by a stork." The mother was
naturally surprised and said, "No, you are mistaken, papa surely never
told you such a thing!" whereupon the little one laughed and ran away.

This was apparently a mode of revenge. Her mother did not wish or was
not able to tell her how the eyes grew into the head, hence she did not
know how Freddy got into her. It was for this reason that she again
tried her with the old story.

       *       *       *       *       *

I wish to impress firmly upon parents and educationists this instructive
example of child psychology. In the learned psychological discussions
on the child's psyche we hear nothing about those parts which are so
important for the health and naturalness of our children, nor do we hear
more about the child's emotions and conflicts; and yet they play a most
important rôle.

It very often happens that children are erroneously treated as quite
imprudent and irrational beings. Thus on indulgently remarking to
an intelligent father, whose four-year-old daughter masturbated
excessively, that care should be exercised in the presence of the child
who slept in the same room as the parents, I received the indignant
reply, "I can absolutely assure you that the child knows nothing about
sexual matters." This recalls that distinguished old neurologist who
wished to deny the attribute "sexual" to a childbirth phantasy which was
represented in a dreamy state.

On the other hand, a child evincing neurotic talent exaggerated by
neurosis may be urged on by solicitous parents. How easy and tempting
it would have been, _e.g._ in the present case, to admire, excite, and
develop prematurely the child's eager desire for learning, and thereby
develop an unnatural _blasé_ state and a precociousness masking a
neurosis! In such cases the parents must look after their own complexes
and complex tendencies and not make capital out of them at the expense
of the child. The idea should be dismissed once for all that children
are to be held in bondage by their parents or that they are their toys.
They are characteristic and new beings. In the matter of enlightenment
on sexual things it can be affirmed that they suffer from the
preconceived opinion that the truth is harmful. Many neurologists are of
opinion that even in grown-ups enlightenment on their own psychosexual
processes is harmful and even immoral. Would not the same persons
perhaps refuse to admit the existence of the genitals themselves?

One should not, however, go from this extreme of prudishness to the
opposite one, namely that of enlightenment _à tout prix_, which may
turn out as foolish as it is disagreeable. In this matter I believe
much discretion is advisable; still if children come upon an idea, they
should be deceived no more than adults.

I hope, ladies and gentlemen, that I have shown you what complicated
psychic processes psychoanalytic investigation reveals in the child, and
how great is the significance of these processes for the mental health
as well as for the general psychic development of the child. What I have
been unable to show is the universal validity of these observations.
Unfortunately, I am not in a position to demonstrate this, for I do not
know myself how much of it is universally valid. Only by accumulation
of such observations and further penetration into the problems broached
shall we gain a complete insight into the laws of psychical development.
It is to be regretted that we are at present still far from this goal.
But I confidently hope that educators and practical psychologists,
whether physicians or deep-thinking parents, will not leave us too long
unassisted in this immensely important and interesting field.


LITERATURE.

     1. FREUD. "Die Traumdeutung," II Auflage. Deuticke, Wien, 1909.

     2. ---- ----. "Sammlung kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre," Band
     I & II. Deuticke, Wien.

     3. ---- ----. "Analyse der Phobie eines 5 jahrigen Knaben,"
     _Jahrbuch für Psychoanalytische u. Psychopathologische
     Forschungen_, Band I. Deuticke, Wien, 1908.

     4. FREUD. "Der Inhalt der Psychose," _Freud's Shriften zur
     angewandten Seelenkunde._ Deuticke, 1908.

     5. JUNG. "Diagnostische Associationsstudien," Band I. Barth,
     Leipzig, 1906.

     6. ---- ----. "Die Psychologische Diagnose des Thatbestandes." Carl
     Marhold, Halle, 1906.

     7. JUNG. "Die Bedeutung des Vaters für das Schicksal des
     Einzelnen." Deuticke, Wien, 1908.

     8. JUNG. "The Psychology of Dementia Præcox," translated by
     Peterson and Brill, _Journal of Mental and Nervous Diseases_,
     Monograph Series, No. 2.

     9. FÜRST. "Statistische Untersuchungen über Wortassoziationen
     und über familiäre Übereinstimmung im Reactionstypus bei
     Ungebildeten," X. Beitrag der Diagnost. Assoc. Studien, vol. II.

     10. BRILL. "Psychological Factors in Dementia Præcox,"
     _Journal of Abnormal Psychology_, vol. III., No. 4.

     11. ---- ----. "A case of Schizophrenia," _American Journal of
     Insanity_, vol. LXVI., No. 1.

     12. "Le Nuove Vedute della Psicologia Criminale," _Rivista de
     Psicologia Applicata_, 1908, No. 4.

     13. "L'Analyse des Rêves," _Année Psychologique_, 1909, Tome
     XV.

     14. "Associations d'idées Familiales," _Archives de
     Psychologie_, T. VII., No. 26.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 125: Lectures delivered at the celebration of the twentieth
anniversary of the opening of Clark University, September, 1909;
translated from the German by Dr. A. A. Brill, of New York. Reprinted by
kind permission of Dr. Stanley Hall.]

[Footnote 126: The selection of these stimulus words was naturally made
for the German language only, and would probably have to be considerably
changed for the English language.]

[Footnote 127: Denotes misunderstanding.]

[Footnote 128: Denotes repetition of the stimulus words.]

[Footnote 129: Denotes repetition of the stimulus words.]

[Footnote 130: + denotes Reproduced unchanged.]

[Footnote 131: Denotes misunderstanding.]

[Footnote 132: Denotes repetition of the stimulus words.]

[Footnote 133: Denotes misunderstanding.]

[Footnote 134: Denotes repetition of the stimulus words.]

[Footnote 135: Denotes repetition of the stimulus words.]

[Footnote 136: Denotes repetition of the stimulus words.]

[Footnote 137: Denotes repetition of the stimulus words.]

[Footnote 138: Denotes repetition of the stimulus words.]

[Footnote 139: Reaction times are always given in fifths of a second.]

[Footnote 140: "Studies in Word Association," in course of publication.]

[Footnote 141: "Jahrbuch für Psychoanalytische und Psychopathologische
Forschungen," Band I. Deuticke, Wien, 1902.]

[Footnote 142: This lecture was originally published in the "Jahrbuch
für Psychoanalytische und Psychopathologische Forschungen," Band II.]

[Footnote 143: "Jahrbuch für Psychoanalytische und Psychopathologische
Forschungen," Band I. Deuticke, Wien, 1902.]

[Footnote 144: Jung: "The Psychology of Dementia Præcox," translated by
Peterson and Brill. _Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases_, Monograph
Series, No. 3.]

[Footnote 145: This wish to sit up with the father and mother until late
at night often plays a great part later in a neurosis.]

[Footnote 146: A doll from Punch and Judy.]

[Footnote 147: See analysis of a five-year-old boy, _Jahrbuch f.
Psychoanalytische u. Psychopathologische Forschungen_, vol. I.]

[Footnote 148: Franz Riklin, "Fulfilment of Wishes and Symbolism in
Fairy Tales."]




CHAPTER III

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE FATHER IN THE DESTINY OF THE INDIVIDUAL[149]


_Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem trahunt._

Freud has pointed out in many places[150] with unmistakable clearness
that the psychosexual relationship of the child towards his parents,
particularly towards the father, possesses an overwhelming importance
in the content of any later neurosis. This relationship is in fact the
infantile channel _par excellence_ in which the libido flows back[151]
when it encounters any obstacles in later years, thus revivifying
long-forgotten dreams of childhood. It is ever so in life when we
draw back before too great an obstacle--the menace of some severe
disappointment or the risk of some too far-reaching decision--the
energy stored up for the solution of the task flows back impotent;
the by-streams once relinquished as inadequate are again filled up.
He who has missed the happiness of woman's love falls back, as a
substitute, upon some gushing friendship, upon masturbation, upon
religiosity; should he be a neurotic he plunges still further back into
the conditions of childhood which have never been quite forsaken, to
which even the normal is fettered by more than one link--he returns to
the relationship to father and mother. Every psychoanalysis carried
out at all thoroughly shows this regression more or less plainly. One
peculiarity which stands out in the works and views of Freud is that
the relationship to the father is seen to possess an overwhelming
importance. This importance of the father in the moulding of the
child's psycho-sexuality may also be discovered in a quite other and
remote field, in the investigation of the family.[152] The most recent
thorough investigations demonstrate the predominating influence of the
father often lasting for centuries. The mother seems of less importance
in the family.[153] If this is true for heredity on the physical side
how much more should we expect from the psychological influences
emanating from the father? These experiences, and those gained more
particularly in an analysis carried out conjointly with Dr. Otto Gross,
have impressed upon me the soundness of this view. The problem has been
considerably advanced and deepened by the investigations of my pupil,
Dr. Emma Fürst, into familial resemblances in the reaction-type.[154]
Fürst made association experiments on one hundred persons belonging
to twenty-four families. Of this extensive material, only the results
in nine families and thirty-seven persons (all uneducated) have been
worked out and published. But the painstaking calculations do already
permit some valuable conclusions. The associations are classified on the
KRÆPELIN-ASCHAFFENBURG scheme as simplified and modified by myself; the
difference is then calculated between each group of qualities of the
subjects experimented upon and the corresponding group of every other
subject experimented upon. Thus we finally get the differentiation of
the mean in reaction-type. The following is the result:--

    Non-related men differ among themselves by 5·9.
    Non-related women differ among themselves by 6·0.
    Related men differ among themselves by 4·1.
    Related women differ among themselves by 3·8.

Relatives, and especially related women, have therefore, on the
average, resemblance in reaction-type. This fact means that the
psychological adaptation of relatives differs but slightly.

An investigation into the various relationships gave the following:--

The mean difference of the husband and wife amounts to 4·7. The mean
deviation of this mean is, however, 3·7, a very high figure, which
signifies that the mean figure 4·7 is composed of very heterogeneous
figures; there are married couples in whom the reaction type is very
close and others in whom it is very slight. On the whole, however,
father and son, mother and daughter stand remarkably close.

The difference between father and son amounts to 3·1.

The difference between mother and daughter amounts to 3·0.

With the exception of a few cases of married couples (where the
difference fell to 1·4) these are the lowest differences. In Fürst's
work there was a case where the difference between the forty-five
year old mother and her sixteen year old daughter was only 0·5. But
it was just in this case that the mother and daughter differed from
the father's type by 11·8. The father is a coarse, stupid man, an
alcoholic; the mother goes in for Christian Science. This corresponds
with the fact that mother and daughter exhibit an extreme word-predicate
type,[155] which is, in my experience, important semeiotically for the
diagnosis of insufficiency in the sexual object. The word-predicate
type transparently applies an excessive amount of emotion externally
and displays emotions with the unconscious, but nevertheless obvious,
endeavour to awaken echoing emotions in the experimenter. This view
closely corresponds with the fact that in Fürst's material the number
of word-predicates increases with the age of the subjects experimented
upon.

The fact of the extreme similarity between the reaction-type of the
offspring and the parents is matter for thought. The association
experiment is nothing but a small section from the psychological life of
a man. At bottom daily life is nothing but an extensive and many-varied
association experiment; in essence we react in life just as we do in
the experiments. Although this truth is evident, still it requires
a certain consideration and limitation. Let us take as an instance
the case of the unhappy mother of forty-five years and her unmarried
daughter of sixteen. The extreme word-predicate type of the mother is,
without doubt, the precipitate of a whole life of disappointed hopes
and wishes. One is not in the least surprised at the word-predicate
type here. But the daughter of sixteen has really not yet lived at all;
her real sexual object has not yet been found, and yet she reacts as if
she were her mother with endless disillusions behind her. She has _the
mother's adaptation_, and in so far she is identified with the mother.
There is ample evidence that the mother's adaptation must be attributed
to her relationship to the father. But the daughter is not married to
the father and therefore does not need this adaptation. She has taken it
over from the influence of her milieu, and later on will try to adapt
herself to the world with this _familial disharmony_. In so far as an
ill-assorted marriage is unsuitable, the adaptation resulting from it is
unsuitable.

Clearly such a fate has many possibilities. To adapt herself to life,
this girl either will have to surmount the obstacles of her familial
milieu, or, unable to free herself from them, she _will succumb to
the fate to which such an adaptation predisposes_ her. Deep within,
unnoticed by any one, there may go on a glossing over of the infantile
disharmony, or a development of the negative of the parents' character,
accompanied by hindrances and conflicts to which she herself has no
clue. Or, growing up, she will come into painful conflict with that
world of actualities to which she is so ill-adapted till one stroke
of fate after another gradually opens her eyes to the fact that it
is herself, infantile and maladjusted, that is amiss. The source
of infantile adaptation to the parents is naturally the affective
condition on both sides; the psycho-sexuality of the parents on one side
and that of the child on the other. It is a kind of psychical infection;
we know that it is not logical truth, but affects and their psychical
expressions[156] which are here the effective forces. It is these that,
with the power of the herd-instinct, press into the mind of the child,
there fashioning and moulding it. In the plastic years between one and
five there have to be worked out all the essential formative lines which
fit exactly into the parental mould. Psychoanalytic experience teaches
us that, as a rule, the first signs of the later conflict between the
parental constellation and individual independence, of the struggle
between repression and libido (Freud), occur before the fifth year.

The few following histories will show how this parental constellation
obstructs the adaptation of the offspring. It must suffice to present
only the chief events of these, that is the events of sexuality.

_Case 1._--A well-preserved woman of 55; dressed poorly but carefully
in black with a certain elegance, the hair carefully dressed; a polite,
obviously affected manner, precise in speech, a devotee. The patient
might be the wife of a minor official or shopkeeper. She informs me,
blushing and dropping her eyes, that she is the divorced wife of a
common peasant. She has come to the hospital on account of depression,
night terrors, palpitations, slight nervous twitchings in the arms,
thus presenting the typical features of a slight climacteric neurosis.
To complete the picture, she adds that she suffers from severe
anxiety-dreams; in her dreams some man seems to be pursuing her, wild
animals attack her, and so on.

Her anamnesis begins with the family history. (So far as possible I
give her own words.) Her father was a fine, stately, rather corpulent
man of imposing appearance. He was very happy in his marriage, for her
mother _worshipped_ him. He was a clever man, a master-mechanic, and
held a dignified and honourable position. There were only two children,
the patient and an elder sister. The sister was the mother's, and the
patient her father's favourite. When the patient was five years old the
father died suddenly from a stroke, at the age of forty-two. The patient
felt herself very isolated and was from that time treated by the mother
and the elder sister as the Cinderella. She noticed clearly enough
that her mother preferred her sister to herself. Her mother remained a
widow, her respect for her husband being too great to allow her to marry
a second time. She preserved his memory "like a religious cult" and
brought up her children in this way.

Later on the sister married, relatively young; the patient did not
marry till twenty-four. She never cared for young men, they all seemed
insipid; her mind turned always to more mature men. When about twenty
she became acquainted with a stately gentleman rather over forty, to
whom she was much drawn. For various reasons the friendship was broken
off. At twenty-four she became acquainted with a widower who had two
children. He was a fine, stately, somewhat corpulent man, and had an
imposing presence, like her father; he was forty-four. She married him
and respected him enormously. The marriage was childless; the children
by the first marriage died from an infectious disease. After four years
of married life her husband also died. For eighteen years she remained
his faithful widow. But at forty-six (just before the menopause) she
experienced a great need of love. As she had no acquaintances she went
to a matrimonial agency and married the first comer, a peasant of some
sixty years who had been already twice divorced on account of brutality
and perverseness; the patient knew this before marriage. She remained
five unbearable years with him, when she also obtained a divorce. The
neurosis set in a little later.

No further discussion will be required for those with psychoanalytic
experience; the case is too obvious. For those unversed in
psychoanalysis let me point out that up to her forty-sixth year the
patient did but reproduce most faithfully the milieu of her earliest
youth. The sexuality which announced itself so late and so drastically,
even here only led to a deteriorated edition of the father-surrogate;
to this she is brought by this late-blossoming sexuality. Despite
repression, the neurosis betrays the ever-fluctuating eroticism of
the aging woman who still wants to please (affectation) but dares not
acknowledge her sexuality.

_Case 2._--A man of thirty-four of small build and with a sensible,
kindly expression. He is easily embarrassed, blushes often. He came for
treatment on account of "nervousness." He says he is very irritable,
readily fatigued, has nervous indigestion, is often deeply depressed so
that he has thought of suicide.

Before coming to me for treatment he sent me a circumstantial
autobiography, or rather a history of his illness, in order to prepare
me for his visit. His story began: "My father was a very big and strong
man." This sentence awakened my curiosity; I turned over a page and
there read: "When I was fifteen a big lad of nineteen took me into the
wood and indecently assaulted me."

The numerous gaps in the patient's story induced me to obtain a more
exact anamnesis from him, which produced the following remarkable facts.

The patient is the youngest of three brothers. His father, a big,
red-haired man, was formerly a soldier in the Papal Swiss Guard, and
then became a policeman. He was a strict, gruff old soldier, who brought
up his sons with military precision; he commanded them, did not call
them by name, but whistled to them. He had spent his youth in Rome,
where he acquired syphilis, from the consequences of which he still
suffered in old age. He was fond of talking about his adventures in
early life. His eldest son (considerably older than the patient) was
exactly like him, he was big, strong and had reddish hair. The mother
was a feeble woman, prematurely aged; exhausted and tired of life, she
died at forty when the patient was eight years old. He preserved a
tender and beautiful memory of his mother.

When he went to school he was always the whipping-boy and always the
object of his schoolfellows' mockery. The patient considers that his
peculiar dialect was to blame for this. Later he was apprenticed to a
severe and unkind master, under most trying conditions, from which all
the other apprentices had run away, finding them intolerable. Here he
held out for over two years. At fifteen the assault already mentioned
took place, in addition to some other slighter homosexual experiences.
Then fate sent him to France. There he made the acquaintance of a man
from the South of France, a great boaster and Don Juan. He dragged
the patient into a brothel; he went unwilling and out of fear. He
was impotent there. Later he went to Paris, where his brother, a
master-mason, the replica of his father, was leading a dissolute
life. There the patient remained a long time, badly paid and helping
his sister-in-law out of pity. The brother often took him along to a
brothel, where the patient was always impotent. Here the brother asked
him to make over to him his inheritance, 6000 francs. He first consulted
his second brother, who was also in Paris, who urgently tried to
dissuade him from giving the money to his brother, because it would only
be squandered. Nevertheless the patient gave his all to his brother,
who indeed soon squandered it. And the second brother, who would have
dissuaded him, was also let in for 500 francs. To my astonished question
why he had so light-heartedly given the money to his brother without
any guarantee, he replied: he had asked for it, he was not a bit sorry
about the money; he would give him another 6000 francs if he had it. The
eldest brother came to grief altogether and his wife divorced him. The
patient returned to Switzerland and remained for a year without regular
employment, often suffering from hunger. During this time he made the
acquaintance of a family where he became a frequent visitor. The husband
belonged to some peculiar sect; he was a hypocrite and neglected his
family. The wife was elderly, ill and weak, and moreover pregnant.
There were six children and great poverty. The patient developed warm
affection for this woman and divided with her the little he possessed.
She brought him her troubles, and said she felt sure she would die in
childbed. Then he promised her (he who possessed nothing) to take charge
of the children himself and bring them up. The wife did die in childbed.
The orphanage-board interfered, however, and allowed him only one child.
So he had a child but no family, and naturally could not bring it up by
himself. He thus came to think of marrying. But as he had never been
in love with any woman he was in great perplexity. It then occurred to
him that his elder brother was divorced from his wife, and he resolved
to marry her. He wrote his intention to her in Paris. She was seventeen
years older than he, but not disinclined to the plan. She invited him
to come to Paris to talk matters over. On the eve of this journey fate,
however, willed that he should run a big iron nail into his foot so that
he could not travel. After a little while, when the wound was healed,
he went to Paris, and found that he had imagined his sister-in-law, and
now his _fiancée_, to be younger and prettier than she really was. The
wedding took place, and three months later the first coitus, at his
wife's initiative. He himself had no desire for it. They brought up the
child together, he in the Swiss and she in the French way, for she was
a French woman. At the age of nine the child was run over and killed
by a cyclist. The patient then felt very lonely and dismal at home. He
proposed to his wife that she should adopt a young girl, whereupon she
broke out into a fury of jealousy. Then for the first time he fell in
love with a young girl, whilst at the same time the neurosis started,
with deep depression and nervous exhaustion, for meanwhile his life at
home had become a hell.

My proposition to separate from his wife was refused out of hand,
because he could not take upon himself to make the old woman unhappy on
his account. He clearly prefers to be tormented still further; for it
would seem that the recollection of his youth is more precious to him
than any present joys.

In this case also the whole movement of a life takes place in the magic
circle of the familial constellation. The relation to the father is the
strongest and most momentous issue; its masochistic homosexual colouring
stands out clearly everywhere. Even the unhappy marriage is determined
in every way through the father, for the patient marries the divorced
wife of his eldest brother, which _is as if_ he married his mother. His
wife is also the representative of the mother-surrogate, of the friend
who died in childbed.

The neurosis started at the moment when the libido had obviously
withdrawn from this relationship of infantile constellation, and
approached, for the first time, the sexual end determined by the
individual. In this, as in the previous case, the familial constellation
proves to be by far the stronger; the narrow field vouchsafed by a
neurosis is all that remains for the display of individuality.

_Case 3._--A thirty-six year old peasant woman, of average intelligence,
healthy appearance and robust build, mother of three healthy children.
Comfortable family circumstances. Patient comes to the hospital for
treatment for the following reasons: for some weeks she has been
terribly wretched and anxious, has been sleeping badly, has terrifying
dreams, and suffers also during the day from anxiety and depression. All
these things are admittedly without foundation, she herself is surprised
at them, and must admit her husband is perfectly right when he insists
they are all "stuff and nonsense." All the same she cannot get away from
them. Strange ideas come to her too; she is going to die and is going to
hell. She gets on very well with her husband.

The psychoanalytic examination of the case immediately brought the
following: some weeks before, she happened to take up some religious
tracts which had long lain about the house unread. There she read that
_swearers_ would go to hell. She took this very much to heart, and has
since thought it incumbent on her to prevent people swearing or she
herself will go to hell. About a fortnight before she read these tracts,
her father, who lived with her, suddenly died from a stroke. She was not
actually present at his death, but arrived when he was already dead.
Her terror and grief were very great.

In the days following the death she thought much about it all, wondering
why her father had to meet his end so abruptly. In the midst of such
meditations it suddenly occurred to her that the last words she had
heard her father say were: "I also am one of those who have fallen from
the cart into the devil's clutches." The remembrance filled her with
grief, and she recalled how often her father had sworn savagely. She
wondered then whether there really were a life after death, and whether
her father were in heaven or hell. During these musings she came across
the tracts and began to read them, getting to the place where it said
that swearers go to hell. Then came upon her great fear and terror;
she overwhelmed herself with reproaches, she ought to have stopped her
father's swearing, deserved punishment for her neglect. She would die
and would be condemned to hell. Henceforth she was full of sorrow,
moody, tormented her husband with this obsessive idea, and renounced all
joy and happiness.

The patient's life-history (reproduced partly in her own words) is as
follows:--

She is the youngest of five brothers and sisters and was always her
_father's favourite_. The father gave her everything she wanted if he
possibly could. For instance, if she wanted a new dress and her mother
refused it, she could be sure her father would bring her one next time
he went to town. The mother died rather early. At twenty-four the
patient married the man of her choice, _against her father's wishes_.
The father simply disapproved of her choice although he had nothing
particular against the man. After the wedding she made her father come
and live with them. That seemed a matter of course, she said, since the
other relations had never suggested having him with them. The father was
a quarrelsome swearer and drunkard. Husband and father-in-law, as may
easily be imagined, got on extremely badly together. The patient would
always meekly fetch her father spirits from the inn, although this gave
rise perpetually to anger and altercations. But she finds her husband
"all right." He is a good, patient fellow with only one failing: he
does not obey her father enough; she finds that incomprehensible, and
would rather have her husband knuckle under to her father. All said and
done, father is still father. In the frequent quarrels she always took
her father's part. But she has nothing to say against her husband and he
is usually right in his protests, but _one must help one's father_.

Soon it began to seem to her that she had sinned against her father
by marrying against his will, and she often felt, after one of these
incessant wrangles, that her love for her husband had quite vanished.
And since her father's death it is impossible to love her husband any
longer, for his disobedience was the most frequent occasion of her
father's fits of raging and swearing. At one time the quarrelling became
too painful for the husband, and he induced his wife to find rooms for
her father elsewhere, where he lived for two years. During this time
husband and wife lived together peaceably and happily. But by degrees
the patient began to reproach herself for letting her father live alone;
in spite of everything he was her father. And in the end, despite the
husband's protests, she fetched him home again because, as she said, in
truth she did love her father better than her husband. Scarcely was the
old man back in the house before strife was renewed. And so it went on
till the father's sudden death.

After this recital she broke out into a whole series of lamentations:
she must separate from her husband: she would have done it long ago if
it were not for the children. She had indeed done an ill-deed, committed
a very great sin when she married her husband against her father's wish.
She ought to have taken the man whom her father had wanted her to have.
He certainly would have obeyed her father and then everything would have
been right. Oh, her husband was not by a long way so kind as her father,
she could do anything with her father, but not with her husband. Her
father had given her everything she wanted. _Now she would best of all
like to die, so that she might be with her father._

When this outburst was over, I inquired eagerly on what grounds she had
refused the husband her father had suggested to her.

The father, a small peasant on a lean little farm, had taken as a
servant, just at the time when his youngest daughter came into the
world, a miserable little boy, a foundling. The boy developed in most
unpleasant fashion: he was so stupid that he could not learn to read
or write or even speak quite properly. He was an absolute idiot. As he
approached manhood there developed on his neck a series of ulcers, some
of which opened and continually discharged pus, giving such a dirty,
ugly creature a horrible appearance. His intelligence did not grow with
his years, so he stayed on as servant in the peasant's house without any
recognised wage.

_To this youth the father wanted to marry his favourite daughter._

The girl, fortunately, had not been disposed to yield, but now she
regretted it, since this idiot would unquestionably have been more
obedient to her father than her good man had been.

Here, as in the foregoing case, it must be clearly understood that the
patient is not at all weak-minded. Both possess normal intelligence,
which unfortunately the blinkers of the infantile constellation prevent
their using. That appears with quite remarkable clearness in this
patient's life-story. The father's authority is never questioned! It
makes not the least difference that he is a quarrelsome drunkard, the
obvious cause of all the quarrels and disturbances; on the contrary, the
lawful husband must give way to the bogey, and at last our patient even
comes to regret that her father did not succeed in completely destroying
her life's happiness. So now she sets about doing that herself through
her neurosis, which compels in her the wish to die, that she may go to
hell, whither, be it noted, the father has already betaken himself.

If we are ever disposed to see some demonic power at work controlling
mortal destiny, surely we can see it here in these melancholy silent
tragedies working themselves out slowly, torturingly, in the sick souls
of our neurotics. Some, step by step, continually struggling against the
unseen powers, do free themselves from the clutches of the demon who
forces his unsuspecting victims from one savage mischance to another:
others rise up and win to freedom, only to be dragged back later to the
old paths, caught in the noose of the neurosis. You cannot even maintain
that these unhappy people are neurotic or "degenerates." If we normal
people examine our lives from the psychoanalytic standpoint, we too
perceive how a mighty hand guides us insensibly to our destiny and not
always is this hand a kindly one.[157] We often call it the hand of God
or of the Devil, for the power of the infantile constellation has become
mighty during the course of the centuries in affording support and proof
to all the religions.

But all this does not go so far as to say that we must cast the blame
of inherited sins upon our parents. A sensitive child whose intuition
is only too quick in reflecting in his own soul all the excesses of his
parents must lay the blame for his fate on his own characteristics.
But, as our last case shows, this is not always so, for the parents can
(and unfortunately only too often do) fortify the evil in the child's
soul, preying upon the child's ignorance to make him the slave of their
complexes. In our case this attempt on the part of the father is quite
obvious. It is perfectly clear why he wanted to marry his daughter to
this brutish creature: _he wanted to keep her and make her his slave
for ever_. What he did is but a crass exaggeration of what is done by
thousands of so-called respectable, educated people, who have their
own share in this educational dust-heap of enforced discipline. The
fathers who allow their children no independent possession of their own
emotions, who fondle their daughters with ill-concealed eroticism and
tyrannical passion, who keep their sons in leading-strings, force them
into callings and finally marry them off "suitably," and the mothers
who even in the cradle excite their children with unhealthy tenderness,
later on make them into slavish puppets, and then at last, out of
jealousy, destroy their children's love-life fundamentally, they all act
not otherwise than this stupid and brutal boor.

It will be asked, wherein lies the parents' magic power to bind their
children to themselves, as with iron fetters, often for the whole
of their lives? The psychoanalyst knows that it is nothing but the
sexuality on both sides.

We are always trying not to admit the child's sexuality. That view only
comes from wilful ignorance, which happens to be very prevalent again
just now.[158]

I have not given any real analysis of these cases. We therefore do not
know what happened within the hearts of these puppets of fate when
they were children. A profound insight into a child's mind as it grows
and lives, hitherto unattainable, is given in Freud's contribution to
the first half-yearly volume of _Jahrbuch für Psychoanalytische u.
Psychopathologische Forschungen_. If I venture, after Freud's masterly
presentation, to offer another small contribution to the study of the
child-mind it is because the psychoanalytic records of cases seem to me
always valuable.

_Case 4._--An eight year old boy, intelligent, rather delicate-looking,
is brought to me by his mother, on account of enuresis. During the
consultation the child always hangs on to his mother, a pretty, youthful
woman. The parents' marriage is a happy one, but the father is strict,
and the boy (the eldest child) is rather afraid of him. The mother
compensates for the father's strictness by corresponding tenderness, to
which the boy responds so much that he never gets away from his mother's
apron-strings. He never plays with his schoolfellows, never goes alone
into the street unless he has to go to school. He fears the boys'
roughness and violence and plays thoughtful games at home or helps his
mother with housework. He is extremely jealous of his father. He cannot
bear it when the father shows tenderness to the mother.

I took the boy aside and asked him about his dreams.

He dreams very often of a _black snake_ which _wants to bite his face_.
Then he cries out, and his mother has to come from the next room to his
bedside.

In the evening he goes quietly to bed. But when he falls asleep it seems
to him that a wicked _black man with a sabre or gun lies on his bed_--_a
tall, thin man who wants to kill him_.

His parents sleep in the adjoining room. It often seems to him that
something dreadful is going on there, as if there are great _black
snakes or wicked men who want to kill his Mamma_. Then he has to cry out
and his mother comes to comfort him.

Every time he wets his bed he calls his mother, who has to settle him
down again in dry things.

The father is a tall thin man. Every morning he stands at the washstand
naked in full view of the child, to perform a thorough ablution. The
child also tells me that at night he is often suddenly waked from sleep
by a strange sound in the next room; then he is always horribly afraid
as if something dreadful were going on in there, some struggle--but his
mother quiets him, says there's nothing to be afraid of.

It is not difficult to see whence comes the black snake and who the
wicked man is, and what is happening in the next room. It is equally
easy to understand the boy's aim when he calls out for his mother: he
is jealous and separates her from the father. This he does also in the
daytime whenever he sees his father caressing her. So far the boy is
simply his father's rival for his mother's love.

But now comes the circumstance that the snake and the bad man also
threaten him, there happens to him the same thing as to his mother in
the next room. Thus he identifies himself with his mother and proposes a
similar relationship for himself with his father. That is owing to his
homosexual component which feels like a woman towards the father. What
enuresis signifies in this case is, from the Freudian standpoint, not
difficult to understand. The micturition dream throws light upon it.
Let me refer to an analysis of the same kind in my article: "L'analyse
des rêves, Année psychologique" (1909). Enuresis must be regarded as an
infantile sex-surrogate; in the dream-life of adults too it is easily
used as a cloak for the urge of sexual desire.

This little example shows what goes on in the mind of an eight year old
boy, when he is in a position of too much dependence upon his parents,
but the blame is also partly due to the too strict father and the too
indulgent mother.

The infantile attitude here, it is evident, is nothing but infantile
sexuality. If now we survey all the far-reaching possibilities of the
infantile constellation, we are forced to say that _in essence our
life's fate is identical with the fate of our sexuality_. If Freud and
his school devote themselves first and foremost to tracing out the
individual's sexuality it is certainly not in order to excite piquant
sensations, but to gain a deeper insight into the driving forces that
determine that individual's fate. In this we are not saying too much,
rather understating the case. If we can strip off the veils shrouding
the problems of individual destiny, we can afterwards widen our view
from the history of the individual to the history of nations. And
first of all we can look at the history of religions, at the history
of the phantasy-systems of whole peoples and epochs. The religion of
the Old Testament elevated the _paterfamilias_ to the Jehovah of the
Jews whom the people had to obey in fear and dread. The Patriarchs are
an intermediate stage towards the deity. The neurotic fear and dread
of the Jewish religion, the imperfect, not to say unsuccessful attempt
at the sublimation of a still too barbarous people, gave rise to the
excessive severity of the Mosaic Law, the ceremonial constraint of the
neurotic.[159]

Only the prophets succeeded in freeing themselves from this constraint;
in them the identification with Jehovah, the complete sublimation,
is successful. They became the fathers of the people. Christ, the
fulfilment of prophecy, put an end to this fear of God and taught
mankind that the true relation to the Godhead is "love." Thus he
destroyed the ceremonial constraint of the Law and gave the example of
a personal loving relationship to God. The later imperfect sublimation
of the Christian Mass leads again to the ceremonial of the Church from
which occasionally the minds capable of sublimation among the saints and
reformers have been able to free themselves. Not without cause therefore
does modern theology speak of "inner" or "personal" experiences as
having great enfranchising power, for always the ardour of love
transmutes the dread and constraint into a higher, freer type of feeling.

What we see in the development of the world-process, the original
source of the changes in the Godhead, we see also in the individual.
Parental power guides the child like a higher controlling fate. But
when he begins to grow up, there begins also the conflict between the
infantile constellation and the individuality, the parental influence
dating from the prehistoric (infantile) period is repressed, sinks into
the unconscious but is not thereby eliminated; by invisible threads it
directs the individual creations of the ripening mind as they appear.
Like everything that has passed into the unconscious, the infantile
constellation sends up into consciousness dim, foreboding feelings,
feelings of mysterious guidance and opposing influences. Here are the
roots of the first religious sublimations. In the place of the father,
with his constellating virtues and faults, there appears, on the one
hand, an altogether sublime deity, on the other the devil, in modern
times for the most part largely whittled away by the perception of one's
own moral responsibility. Elevated love is attributed to the former,
a lower sexuality to the latter. As soon as we approach the territory
of the neurosis, the antithesis is stretched to the utmost limit. God
becomes the symbol of the most complete sexual repression, the Devil the
symbol of sexual lust. Thus it is that the conscious expression of the
father-constellation, like every expression of an unconscious complex
when it appears in consciousness, gets its Janus-face, its positive and
its negative components. A curious, beautiful example of this crafty
play of the unconscious is seen in the love-episode in the Book of
Tobias. Sarah, the daughter of Raguel in Ecbatana, desires to marry; but
her evil fate wills it that seven times, one after another, she chooses
a husband who dies on the marriage-night. The evil spirit Asmodi, by
whom she is persecuted, kills these husbands. She prays to Jehovah to
let her die rather than suffer this shame again. She is despised even by
her father's maid-servants. The eighth bridegroom, Tobias, is sent to
her by God. He too is led into the bridal-chamber. Then the old Raguel,
who has only pretended to go to bed, gets up again and goes out and digs
his son-in-law's grave beforehand, and in the morning sends a maid to
the bridal-chamber to make sure of the expected death. But this time
Asmodi's part is played out, Tobias is alive.

Unfortunately medical etiquette forbids me to give a case of hysteria
which fits in exactly with the above instance, except that there were
not seven husbands, but only three, ominously chosen under all the signs
of the infantile constellation. Our first case too comes under this
category and in our third we see the old peasant at work preparing to
dedicate his daughter to a like fate.

As a pious and obedient daughter (compare her beautiful prayer in
chapter iii.) Sarah has brought about the usual sublimation and cleavage
of the father-complex and on the one side has elevated her childish
love to the adoration of God, on the other has turned the obsessive
force of her father's attraction into the persecuting demon Asmodi.
The legend is so beautifully worked out that it displays the father in
his twofold aspect, on the one hand as the inconsolable father of the
bride, on the other as the secret digger of his son-in-law's grave,
whose fate he foresees. This beautiful fable has become a cherished
paradigm for my analysis, for by no means infrequent are such cases
where the father-demon has laid his hand upon his daughter, so that
her whole life long, even when she does marry, there is never a true
union, because her husband's image never succeeds in obliterating the
unconscious and eternally operative infantile father-ideal. This is
valid not only for daughters, but equally for sons. A fine instance of
such a father-constellation is given in Dr. Brill's recently published:
"Psychological factors in dementia præcox. An analysis."[160]

In my experience the father is usually the decisive and dangerous object
of the child's phantasy, and if ever it happens to be the mother, I have
been able to discover behind her a grandfather to whom she belonged in
her heart.

I must leave this question open: my experience does not go far enough to
warrant a decision. It is to be hoped that the experience of the coming
years will sink deeper shafts into this still dark land which I have
been able but momentarily to light up, and will discover to us more of
the secret workshop of that fate-deciding demon of whom Horace says:

    "Scit Genius natale comes qui temperat astrum,
     Naturæ deus humanæ, mortalis in unum,
     Quodque caput, vultu mutabilis, albus et ater."


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 149: _Jahrbuch für Psychoanalytische und Psychopathologische
Forschungen_, vol. I., 1909. Translator, Dr. M. D. Eder.]

[Footnote 150: Freud, especially "The Interpretation of Dreams."]

[Footnote 151: Libido is what earlier psychologists called "will"
or "tendency." The Freudian expression is _denominatio a potiori_.
_Jahrbuch_, vol. I., p. 155, 1909.]

[Footnote 152: Sommer, "Familienforschung und Vererbungslehre." Barth,
Leipzig, 1907. Joerger, "Die Familie, Zero," _Arch. für Rassen u.
Gesellschaftsbiologie_, 1905. M. Ziermer (pseudonym), "Genealogische
Studien über die Vererbung geistiger Eigenschaften," ibid., 1908.]

[Footnote 153: For the importance of the mother, see "The Psychology of
the Unconscious." C. G. Jung. Moffart, Yard and Co., New York.]

[Footnote 154: E. Fürst, "Statistische Untersuchungen über
Wortassoziationen und über familiäre Übereinstimmung im Reaktionstypus
bei Ungebildeten. Beitrag der diagnostischen Assoziationsstudien
herausgegeben von Dr. C. G. Jung," _Journal für Psychologie und
Neurologie_, Bd. II., 1907. (Reprinted in volume two of the Joint
Reports.)]

[Footnote 155: By this type I understand reactions where the response
to the stimulus-word is a predicate subjectively accentuated instead of
an objective relation, _e.g_., Flower, pleasant; frog, horrible; piano,
terrible; salt, bad; singing, sweet; cooking, useful (see p. 124).]

[Footnote 156: Cf. Vigouroux et Jaqueliers, "La contagion mentale,"
Chapitre VI. Doin, Paris, 1905.]

[Footnote 157: Between whiles we believe ourselves masters of our acts
at any given moment. But when we look back along our life's path and
fix our eyes chiefly upon our unfortunate steps and their consequences,
often we cannot understand how we came to do this and leave that undone,
and it seems as if some power outside ourselves had directed our steps.
Shakespeare says;

    "Fate show thy force: ourselves we do not owe;
     What is decreed must be, and be this so!"

Schopenhauer, "Ueber die anscheinende Absichtlichkeit im Schicksale des
Einzelnen. Parerga und Paralipomena."]

[Footnote 158: This was seen in the Amsterdam Congress of 1907, where
a prominent French savant assured us that the Freudian theory was but
"une plaisanterie." This gentleman has demonstrably neither read Freud's
latest works nor mine, he knows less about the subject than a little
child. This opinion, so admirably grounded, ended with the applause of a
well-known German professor. One can but bow before such thoroughness.
At the same Congress another well-known German neurologist immortalised
his name with the following intellectual reasoning: "If hysteria on
Freud's conception does indeed rest on repressed affects, then the whole
German army must be hysterical."]

[Footnote 159: Cf. Freud, "Zeitschrift für Religionspsychologie," 1907.]

[Footnote 160: _Journal of Abnormal Psychology_, vol. III., p. 219,
1908.]




CHAPTER IV

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF RUMOUR[161]


About a year ago the school authorities in N. asked me to give a
professional opinion as to the mental condition of Marie X., a thirteen
year old schoolgirl. Marie had been expelled from school because she
had been instrumental in originating an ugly rumour, spreading gossip
about her class-teacher. The punishment hit the child, and especially
her parents, very hard, so that the school authorities were inclined
to readmit her if protected by a medical opinion. The facts were as
follows:--

The teacher had heard indirectly that the girls were attributing some
equivocal sexual story to him. On investigation it was found that Marie
X. had one day related a dream to three girl-friends which ran somewhat
as follows:--

"The class was going to the swimming-baths. I had to go to the boys'
because there was no more room. Then we swam a long way out in the lake
(asked 'who did so': 'Lina P., the teacher, and myself'). A steamer came
along. The teacher asked us if we wished to get into it. We came to
K. A wedding was just going on there (asked 'whose': 'a friend of the
teacher's'). We were also to take part in it. Then we went for a journey
(who? 'I, Lina P., and the teacher'). It was like a honeymoon journey.
We came to Andermatt, and there was no more room in the hotel, so we
were obliged to pass the night in a barn. The woman got a child there,
and the teacher became the godfather."

When I examined the child she told this dream. The teacher had likewise
related the dream in writing. In this earlier version the obvious
blanks after the word "steamer" in the above text were filled up as
follows: "We got up. Soon we felt cold. An old man gave us a blouse
which the teacher put on." On the other hand, there was an omission of
the passage about finding no room in the hotel and being obliged to pass
the night in the barn.

The child told the dream immediately, not only to her three friends but
also to her mother. The mother repeated it to me with only trifling
differences from the two versions given above. The teacher, in his
further investigations, carried out with deepest misgivings, failed,
like myself, to get indications of any more dangerous material. There
is therefore a strong probability that the original recital could not
have run very differently. (The passage about the cold and the blouse
seems to be an early interpolation, for it is an attempt to supply a
logical relationship. Coming out of the water one is wet, has on only a
bathing dress, and is therefore unable to take part in a wedding before
putting on some clothes.) At first, of course, the teacher would not
allow that the whole affair had arisen only out of a dream. He rather
suspected it to be an invention. He was, however, obliged to admit that
the innocent telling of the dream was apparently a fact, and that it was
unnatural to regard the child as capable of such guile as to indicate
some sexual equivocation in this disguised form. For a time he wavered
between the view that it was a question of cunning invention, and the
view that it was really a question of a dream, innocent in itself, which
had been understood by the other children in a sexual way. When his
first indignation wore off he concluded that Marie X.'s guilt could not
be so great, and that her phantasies and those of her companions had
contributed to the rumour. He then did something really valuable. He
placed Marie's companions under supervision, and made them all write out
what they had heard of the dream.

Before turning our attention to this, let us cast a glance at the
dream analytically. In the first place, we must accept the facts and
agree with the teacher that we have to do with a dream and not with
an invention; for the latter the ambiguity is too great. Conscious
invention tries to create unbroken transitions; the dream takes no
account of this, but sets to work regardless of gaps, which, as we
have seen, here give occasion for interpolations during the conscious
revision. The gaps are very significant. In the swimming-bath there is
no picture of undressing, being unclothed, nor any detailed description
of their being together in the water. The omission of being dressed
on the ship is compensated for by the above-mentioned interpolation,
but only for the teacher, thus indicating that his nakedness was in
most urgent need of cover. The detailed description of the wedding
is wanting, and the transition from the steamer to the wedding is
abrupt. The reason for stopping overnight in the barn at Andermatt is
not to be found at first. The parallel to this is, however, the want
of room in the swimming-bath, which made it necessary to go into the
men's department; in the hotel the want of room again emphasises the
separation of the sexes. The picture of the barn is most insufficiently
filled out. The birth suddenly follows and quite without sequence.
The teacher as godfather is extremely equivocal. Marie's rôle in the
whole story is throughout of secondary importance, indeed she is only a
spectator.

All this has the appearance of a genuine dream, and those of my readers
who have a wide experience of the dreams of girls of this age will
assuredly confirm this view. Hence the meaning of the dream is so simple
that we may quietly leave its interpretation to her school-companions,
whose declarations are as follows:


AURAL WITNESSES.

_Witness I._--"M. dreamed that she and Lina P. had gone swimming with
our teacher. After they had swum out in the lake pretty far, M. said she
could not swim any further as her foot hurt her so much. The teacher
said she might sit on my[162] back. M. got up and they swam out. After a
time a steamer came along and they got up on it. Our teacher seems to
have had a rope by which he tied M. and L. together and dragged them out
into the lake. They travelled thus as far as Z., where they stepped out.
But now they had no clothes on. The teacher bought a jacket whilst M.
and L. got a long, thick veil, and all three walked up the street along
the lake. This was when the wedding was going on. Presently they met the
party. The bride had on a blue silk dress but no veil. She asked M. and
L. if they would be kind enough to give her their veil. M. and L. gave
it, and in return they were allowed to go to the wedding. They went into
the Sun Inn. Afterwards they went a honeymoon journey to Andermatt; I do
not know now whether they went to the Inn at A. or at Z. There they got
coffee, potatoes, honey, and butter."

"I must not say any more, only the teacher finally was made godfather."

_Remarks._--The roundabout story concerning the want of room in the
swimming-bath is absent; Marie goes direct with her teacher to the bath.
Their persons are more closely bound together in the water by means of
the rope fastening the teacher and the two girls together. The ambiguity
of the "getting up" in the first story has other consequences here, for
the part about the steamer in the first story now occurs in two places;
in the first the teacher takes Marie on his back. The delightful little
slip "she could sit on my back" (instead of _his_), shows the real part
taken by the narrator herself in this scene. This makes it clear why
the dream brings the steamer somewhat abruptly into action, in order to
give an innocent, harmless turn to the equivocal "getting up" instead of
another which is common, for instance, in music-hall songs. The passage
about the want of clothing, the uncertainty of which has been already
noticed, arouses the special interest of the narrator. The teacher buys
a jacket, the girls get a long veil (such as one only wears in case
of death or at weddings). That the latter is meant is shown by the
remark that the bride had none (it is the bride who wears the veil).
The narrator, a girl-friend of Marie, here helps the dreamer to dream
further: the possession of the veil designates the bride or the brides,
Marie and Lina. Whatever is shocking or immoral in this situation is
relieved by the girls giving up the veil; it then takes an innocent
turn. The narrator follows the same mechanism in the cloaking of the
equivocal scene at Andermatt; there is nothing but nice food, coffee,
potatoes, honey, butter, a turning back to the infantile life according
to the well-known method. The conclusion is apparently very abrupt: the
teacher becomes a godfather.

_Witness II._--M. dreamt she had gone bathing with L. P. and the
teacher. Far out in the lake M. said to the teacher that her leg was
hurting her very much. Then the teacher said she could get up on him.
I don't know now whether the last sentence was really so told, but I
think so. As there was just then a ship on the lake the teacher said
she should swim as far as the ship and then get in. I don't remember
exactly how it went on. Then the teacher or M., I don't really remember
which, said they would get out at Z. and run home. Then the teacher
called out to two gentlemen who had just been bathing there, that they
might carry the children to land. Then L. P. sat up on one man, and M.
on the other fat man, and the teacher held on to the fat man's leg and
swam after them. Arrived on land they ran home. On the way the teacher
met his friend who had a wedding. M. said: "It was then the fashion to
go on foot, not in a carriage." Then the bride said she must now go
along also. Then the teacher said it would be nice if the two girls gave
the bride their black veils, which they had got on the way. I can't now
remember how. The children gave it her, and the bride said they were
really dear generous children. Then they went on further and put up at
the Sun Hotel. There they got something to eat, I don't know exactly
what. Then they went to a barn and danced. All the men had taken off
their coats except the teacher. Then the bride said he ought to take off
his coat also. Then the teacher hesitated but finally did so. Then the
teacher was.... Then the teacher said he was cold. I must not tell any
more; it is improper. That's all I heard of the dream.

_Remarks._--The narrator pays special attention to the getting up, but
is uncertain whether in the original it referred to getting up on the
teacher or the steamer. This uncertainty is, however, amply compensated
for by the elaborate invention of the two strangers who take the girls
upon their backs. The getting up is too valuable a thought for the
narrator to surrender, but she is troubled by the idea of the teacher
seeing the object. The want of clothing likewise arouses much interest.
The bride's veil has, it is true, become the black veil of mourning
(naturally in order to conceal anything indelicate). There is not only
no innocent twisting, but it is conspicuously virtuous ("dear, generous
children"); the amoral wish has become changed into virtue which
receives special emphasis, arousing suspicion as does every accentuated
virtue.

This narrator exuberantly fills in the blanks in the scene of the barn:
the men take off their coats; the teacher also, and is therefore ...
_i.e._ naked and hence cold. Whereupon it becomes too improper.

The narrator has correctly recognised the parallels which were suspected
in the criticisms of the original dream; she has filled in the scene
about the undressing which belongs to the bathing, for it must finally
come out that the girls are together with the naked teacher.

_Witness III._--M. told me she had dreamt: Once I went to the baths but
there was no room for me. The teacher took me into his dressing-room.
I undressed and went bathing. I swam until I reached the bank. Then I
met the teacher. He said would I not like to swim across the lake with
him. I went, and L. P. also. We swam out and were soon in the middle of
the lake. I did not want to swim any further. Now I can't remember it
exactly. Soon a ship came up, and we got up on the ship. The teacher
said, "I am cold," and a sailor gave us an old shirt. The three of us
each tore a piece of the shirt away. I fastened it round the neck. Then
we left the ship and swam away towards K.

L. P. and I did not want to go further, and two fat men took us upon
their backs. In K. we got a veil which we put on. In K. we went into
the street. The teacher met his friend who invited us to the wedding.
We went to the Sun and played games. We also danced the polonaise;
now I don't remember exactly. Then we went for a honeymoon journey to
Andermatt. The teacher had no money with him, and stole some chestnuts
in Andermatt. The teacher said, "I am so glad that I can travel with my
two pupils." Then there is something improper which I will not write.
The dream is now finished.

_Remarks._--The undressing together now takes place in the narrow
space of the dressing-room at the baths. The want of dress on the ship
gives occasion to a further variant. (The old shirt torn in three.)
In consequence of great uncertainty the getting up on the teacher is
not mentioned. Instead, the two girls get up on two fat men. As "fat"
becomes so prominent it should be noted that the teacher is more than a
little plump. The setting is thoroughly typical; each one has a teacher.
The duplication or multiplication of the persons is an expression of
their significance, _i.e._ of the stored-up libido.[163] (Compare the
duplication of the attribute in dementia præcox in my "Psychology of
Dementia Præcox.") In cults and mythologies the significance of this
duplication is very striking. (Cp. the Trinity and the two mystical
formulas of confession: "Isis una quæ es omnia. Hermes omnia solus
et ter unus.") Proverbially we say he eats, drinks, or sleeps "for
two." The multiplication of the personality expresses also an analogy
or comparison--_my friend_ has the same "ætiological value" (Freud)
as _myself_. In dementia præcox, or schizophrenia, to use Bleuler's
wider and better term, the multiplication of the personality is mainly
the expression of the stored-up libido, for it is invariably the
person to whom the patient has transference who is subjected to this
multiplication. ("There are two professors N." "Oh, you are also Dr.
J.; this morning another came to see me who called himself Dr. J.") It
seems that, corresponding to the general tendency in schizophrenia,
this splitting is an analytic degradation whose motive is to prevent
the arousing of too violent impressions. A final significance of the
multiplication of personality which, however, does not come exactly
under this concept is the raising of some attribute of the person to a
living figure. A simple instance is Dionysos and his companion Phales,
wherein Phales is the equivalent of Phallos, the personification of
the penis of Dionysos. The so-called attendants of Dionysos (Satyri,
Sileni, Mænades, Mimallones, etc.) consist of the personification of the
attributes of Dionysos.

The scene in Andermatt is portrayed with a nice wit, or more properly
speaking, dreamt further: "The teacher steals chestnuts," that is
equivalent to saying he does what is prohibited. By chestnuts is meant
roasted chestnuts, which on account of the incision are known as a
female sexual symbol. Thus the remark of the teacher, that he was
especially glad to travel with his pupils, following directly upon
the theft of the chestnuts, becomes intelligible. This theft of the
chestnuts is certainly a personal interpolation, for it does not occur
in any of the other accounts. It shows how intensive was the inner
participation of the school companions of Marie X. in the dream, resting
upon similar ætiological requirements.

This is the last of the aural witnesses. The story of the veil, the
pain in the feet, are items which we may perhaps suspect to have been
suggested in the original narrative. Other interpolations are, however,
absolutely personal, and are due to independent inner participation in
the meaning of the dream.


HEARSAY EVIDENCE.

(I.) The whole school had to go bathing with the teacher. M. X. had
no place in the bath in which to undress. Then the teacher said: "You
can come into my room and undress with me." She must have felt very
uncomfortable. When both were undressed they went into the lake. The
teacher took a long rope and wound it round M. Then they both swam far
out. But M. got tired, and then the teacher took her upon his back.
Then M. saw Lina P.; she called out to her, Come along with me, and Lina
came. Then they all swam out still farther. They met a ship. Then the
teacher asked, "May we get in? these girls are tired." The boat stopped,
and they could all get up. I do not know exactly how they came ashore
again at K. Then the teacher got an old night-shirt. He put it on. Then
he met an old friend who was celebrating his wedding. The teacher, M.
and L. were invited. The wedding was celebrated at the Crown in K. They
wanted to play the polonaise. The teacher said he would not accompany
them. Then the others said he might as well. He did it with M. The
teacher said: "I shall not go home again to my wife and children. I love
you best, M." She was greatly pleased. After the wedding there was the
honeymoon journey. The teacher, M. and L. had to accompany the others
also. The journey was to Milan. Afterwards they went to Andermatt, where
they could find no place to sleep. They went to a barn, where they could
stop the night all together. I must not say any more because it becomes
highly improper.

_Remarks._--The undressing in the swimming-bath is properly detailed.
The union in the water receives a further simplification for which the
story of the rope led the way; the teacher fastens himself to Marie.
Lina P. is not mentioned at all; she only comes later when Marie is
already sitting upon the teacher. The dress is here a jacket. The
wedding ceremony contains a very direct meaning. "The teacher will not
go home any more to wife and child." Marie is the darling. In the barn
they all found a place together, and then it becomes highly improper.

(II.) It was said that she had gone with the school to the
swimming-baths to bathe. But as the baths were over-full the teacher had
called her to come to him. We swam out to the lake, and L. P. followed
us. Then the teacher took a string and bound us to one another. I do not
know now exactly how they again got separated. But after a long time
they suddenly arrived at Z. There a scene is said to have taken place
which I would rather not tell, for if it were true it would be too
disgraceful; also now I don't know exactly how it is said to have been,
for I was very tired, only I also heard that M. X. is said to have told
how she was always to remain with our teacher, and he again and again
caressed her as his favourite pupil. If I knew exactly I would also say
the other thing, but my sister only said something about a little child
which was born there, and of which the teacher was said to have been the
godfather.

_Remarks._--Note that in this story the improper scene is inserted in
the place of the wedding ceremony, where it is as apposite as at the
end, for the attentive reader will certainly have already observed
that the improper scene could have taken place in the swimming-bath
dressing-room. The procedure has been adopted which is so frequent
in dreams as a whole; the final thoughts of a long series of dream
images contain exactly what the first image of the series was trying
to represent. The censor pushes the complex away as long as possible
through ever-renewed disguises, displacements, innocent renderings,
etc. It does not take place in the bathing-room, in the water the
"getting up" does not occur, on landing it is not on the teacher's back
that the girls are sitting, it is another pair who are married in the
barn, another girl has the child, and the teacher is only--godfather.
All these images and situations are, however, directed to pick out the
complex, the desire for coitus. Nevertheless the action still occurs at
the back of all these metamorphoses, and the result is the birth placed
at the end of the scene.

(III.) Marie said: the teacher had a wedding with his wife, and they
went to the "Crown" and danced with one another. M. said a lot of wild
things which I cannot repeat or write about, for it is too embarrassing.

_Remarks._--Here everything is too improper to be told. Note that the
marriage takes place with the wife.

(IV.) ... that the teacher and M. once went bathing, and he asked M.
whether she wanted to come along too. She said "yes." When they had gone
out together they met L. P., and the teacher asked whether she wished to
come along. And they went out farther. Then I also heard that she said
that the teacher said L. P. and she were the favourite pupils. She also
told us that the teacher was in his swimming drawers. Then they went to
a wedding, and the bride got a little child.

_Remarks._--The personal relationship to the teacher is strongly
emphasised (the "favourite pupils"), likewise the want of clothing
("swimming drawers").

(V.) M. and L. P. went bathing with the teacher. When M. and L. P. and
the teacher had swum a little way, M. said: "I cannot go any further,
teacher, my foot hurts me." Then the teacher said she should sit on his
back, which M. did. Then a small steamer came along, and the teacher
got into the ship. The teacher had also two ropes, and he fastened both
children to the ship. Then they went together to Z. and got out there.
Then the teacher bought himself a dressing jacket and put it on, and the
children had put a cloth over themselves. The teacher had a bride, and
they were in a barn. Both children were with the teacher and the bride
in the barn, and danced. I must not write the other thing, for it is too
awful.

_Remarks._--Here Marie sits upon the teacher's back. The teacher fastens
the two children by ropes to the ship, from which it can be seen how
easily ship is put for teacher. The jacket again emerges as the piece of
clothing. It was the teacher's own wedding, and what is improper comes
after the dance.

(VI.) The teacher is said to have gone bathing with the whole school. M.
could not find any room, and she cried. The teacher is said to have told
M. she could come into his dressing-room.

"I must leave out something here and there," said my sister, "for it is
a long story." But she told me something more which I must tell in order
to speak the truth. When they were in the bath the teacher asked M. if
she wished to swim out into the lake with him. To which she replied, "If
I go along, you come also." Then we swam until about half-way. Then M.
got tired, and then the teacher pulled her by a cord. At K. they went on
land, and from there to Z. (The teacher was all the time dressed as in
the bath.) There we met a friend, whose wedding it was. We were invited
by this friend. After the ceremony there was a honeymoon journey, and
we came to Milan. We had to pass one night in a barn where something
occurred which I cannot say. The teacher said we were his favourite
pupils, and he also kissed M.

_Remarks._--The excuse "I must leave out something here and there"
replaces the undressing. The teacher's want of clothing is emphasised.
The journey to Milan is a typical honeymoon. This passage also seems
to be an independent fancy, due to some personal participation. Marie
clearly figures as the loved one.

(VII.) The whole school and the teacher went bathing. They all went
into one room. The teacher also. M. alone had no place, and the teacher
said to her, "I have still room," she went. Then the teacher said, "Lie
on my back, I will swim out into the lake with you." I must not write
any more, for it is improper; I can hardly say it at all. Beyond the
improper part which followed I do not know any more of the dream.

_Remarks._--The narrator approaches the basis. Marie is to lie upon the
teacher's back in the bathing compartment. Beyond the improper part she
cannot give any more of the dream.

(VIII.) The whole school went bathing. M. had no room and was invited
by the teacher into his compartment. The teacher swam out with her and
told her that she was his darling or something like that. When they got
ashore at Z. a friend was just having a wedding and he invited them both
in their swimming costumes. The teacher found an old dressing jacket and
put it over the swimming drawers. He (the teacher) also kissed M. and
said he would not return home to his wife any more. They were also both
invited on the honeymoon journey. On the journey they passed Andermatt,
where they could not find any place to sleep, and so had to sleep in
the hay. There was a woman; the dreadful part now comes, it is not at
all right to make something serious into mockery and laughter. This
woman got a small child. I will not say any more now, for it becomes too
dreadful.

_Remarks._--The narrator is thoroughgoing. (He told her simply she was
his darling. He kissed her and said he would not go home to his wife.)
The vexation about the silly tattling which breaks through at the end
suggests some peculiarity in the narrator. From subsequent investigation
it was found that this girl was the only one of the witnesses who had
been early and intentionally given an explanation about sex by her
mother.


EPICRISIS.

So far as the interpretation of the dream is concerned, there is nothing
for me to add; the children have taken care of all the essentials,
leaving practically nothing over for psychoanalytic interpretation.
_Rumour has analysed and interpreted the dream._ So far as I know
rumour has not hitherto been investigated in this new capacity. This
case certainly makes it appear worth while to fathom the psychology of
rumour. In the presentation of the material I have purposely restricted
myself to the psychoanalytic point of view, although I do not deny that
my material offers numerous openings for the invaluable researches of
the followers of Stern, Claparède, and others.

The material enables us to understand the structure of the rumour, but
psychoanalysis cannot rest satisfied with that. The why and wherefore
of the whole manifestation demands further knowledge. As we have
seen, the teacher, astonished by this rumour, was left puzzled by the
problem, wondering as to its cause and effect. How can a dream which
is notoriously incorrect and meaningless (for teachers are, as is well
known, grounded in psychology) produce such effects, such malicious
gossip? Faced by this, the teacher seems to have instinctively hit upon
the correct answer. The effect of the dream can only be explained by its
being "le vrai mot de la situation," _i.e._ that the dream formed the
fit expression for something that was already in the air. It was the
spark which fell into the powder magazine. The material contains all
the proofs essential for this view. I have repeatedly drawn attention
to their own unrecognised participation in the dream by Marie's
school-companions, and the special points of interest where any of them
have added their own phantasies or dreams. The class consists of girls
between twelve and thirteen years of age, who therefore are in the midst
of the prodromata of puberty. The dreamer Marie X. is herself physically
almost completely developed sexually, and in this respect ahead of her
class; she is therefore a leader who has given the watchword for the
unconscious, and thus brought to expression the sexual complexes of her
companions which were lying there ready prepared.

As can be easily understood, the occasion was most painful to the
teacher. The supposition that therein lay some secret motive of the
schoolgirls is justified by the psychoanalytic axiom--judge actions by
their results rather than by their conscious motives.[164] Consequently
it would be probable that Marie X. had been especially troublesome to
her teacher. Marie at first liked this teacher most of all. In the
course of the latter half-year her position had, however, changed. She
had become dreamy and inattentive, and towards the dusk of evening was
afraid to go into the streets for fear of bad men. She talked several
times to her companions about sexual things in a somewhat obscene way;
her mother asked me anxiously how she should explain the approaching
menstruation to her daughter. On account of this alteration in conduct
Marie had forfeited the good opinion of her teacher, as was clearly
evidenced for the first time by a school report, which she and some of
her friends had received a few days before the outbreak of the rumour.
The disappointment was so great that the girls had imagined all kinds of
fancied acts of revenge against the teacher; for instance, they might
push him on to the lines so that the train would run over him, etc.
Marie was especially to the fore in these murderous phantasies. On the
night of this great outburst of anger, when her former liking for her
teacher seemed quite forgotten, that repressed part of herself announced
itself in the dream, and fulfilled its desire for sexual union with the
teacher--as a compensation for the hate which had filled the day.

On waking, the dream became a subtle instrument of her hatred, because
the wish-idea was also that of her school companions, as it always is in
rumours of this kind. Revenge certainly had its triumph, but the recoil
upon Marie herself was still more severe. Such is the rule when our
impulses are given over to the unconscious. Marie X. was expelled from
school, but upon my report she was allowed to return to it.

I am well aware that this little communication is inadequate and
unsatisfactory from the point of view of exact science. Had the original
story been accurately verified we should have clearly demonstrated what
we have now been only able to suggest. This case therefore only posits
a question, and it remains for happier observers to collect convincing
experiences in this field.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 161: "Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse," 1911, vol. I., p. 81.]

[Footnote 162: Author's italics.]

[Footnote 163: This also holds good for any objects that are repeated.]

[Footnote 164: See "The Association Method," Lecture III.]




CHAPTER V

ON THE SIGNIFICANCE OF NUMBER-DREAMS[165]


The symbolism of numbers which greatly engaged the imaginative
philosophy of earlier centuries has again acquired a fresh interest from
the analytic investigations of Freud and his school. But in the material
of number-dreams we no longer discover conscious puzzles of symbolic
concatenations of numbers but the unconscious roots of the symbolism of
numbers. There is scarcely anything quite fundamentally new to offer
in this sphere since the presentations of Freud, Adler and Stekel. It
must here suffice to corroborate their experiences by recording parallel
cases. I have had under observation a few cases of this kind which are
worth reporting for their general interest.

The first three instances are from a middle-aged married man whose
conflict of the moment was an extra-conjugal love affair. The piece
of the dream from which I take the symbolised number is: _in front of
the manager his general subscription. The manager comments on the high
number of the subscription. It reads 2477._

The analysis of the dream brings out a rather ungentlemanly reckoning up
of the expense of the affair, which is foreign to the generous nature
of the dreamer, and which the unconscious makes use of as a resistance
to this affair. The preliminary interpretation is, therefore, that the
number has some financial importance and origin. A rough estimate of the
expenses so far leads to a number which in fact approaches 2477 francs;
a more exact reckoning, however, gives 2387 francs, which could be only
arbitrarily translated into 2477. I then left the numbers to the free
association of the patient; it occurs to him that the figure in the
dream should be divided as 24-77. Perhaps it is a telephone number; this
supposition proves incorrect. The next association is that it is the
total of some numbers. A reminiscence then occurs to him that he once
told me that he had celebrated the 100th birthday of his mother and
himself when his mother was 65 and he was 35 years old. (Their birthdays
are on the same day.)

In this way the patient arrived at the following series of
associations:--

    He is born on                          26 II.
    His mistress                           28 VIII.
    His wife                                1 III.
    His mother (his father is long dead)   26 II.
    His two children                       29 IV.
                                     and   13 VII.
    The patient is born                    II. 75.
    His mistress                           VIII. 85.

He is now 36 years old, his mistress 25.

If this series of associations is written in the usual figures, the
following addition is arrived at:--

    26. II.     =     262
    28. VIII.   =     288
     1. III.    =      13
    26. II.     =     262
    29. IV.     =     294
    13. VII.    =     137
    II. 75.     =     275
    VIII. 85    =     885
          25    =      25
          36    =      36
                     ----
                     2477

This series, which includes all the members of his family, gives the
number 2477.

This construction led to a deeper layer of the dream's meaning. The
patient is most closely united to his family, but on the other hand very
much in love. This situation provokes a severe conflict. The detailed
description of the manager's appearance (which I leave out for the sake
of brevity) pointed to the analyst, from whom the patient rightly fears
and desires firm control and criticism of his condition of dependence
and bondage.

The dream which followed soon afterwards, reported in brief, runs: _The
analyst asks the patient what he actually does at his mistress'? to
which the patient replied he plays there, and that indeed on a very high
number, on 152. The analyst remarks: "You are sadly cheated."_

The analysis displayed again a repressed tendency to reckon up the
expense of the affair. The amount spent monthly was close on 152 francs,
it was from 148-158 francs. The remark that he was being cheated
alludes to the point at issue in the difficulties of the patient with
his mistress. She maintains that he had deflowered her; he, on the
contrary, is firmly convinced that she was not a virgin, and that she
had already been seduced by some one else at the time when he was
seeking her favours and she was refusing him. The expression "number"
leads to the associations: number of the gloves, calibre-number. From
there the next step was to the fact that he recognized, at the first
coitus, a noticeable width of the opening instead of the expected
resistance of the hymen. To him, this is proof of the deception. The
unconscious naturally makes use of this opportunity as an effective
means of opposition to the relationship. 152 proves at first refractory
to further analysis. The number on a subsequent occasion aroused the
really not remote association, "house-number." Then came this series of
associations. When the patient first knew her the lady lived at X Street
No. 17, then Y Street No. 129, then Z Street No. 48.

Here the patient thought that he had clearly gone far beyond 152, the
total being 194. It then occurred to him that the lady had removed
from No. 48 Z Street at his instigation for certain reasons; it must
therefore run 194 - 48 = 146. She now lives in A Street No. 6, therefore
146 + 6 = 152.

The following dream was obtained during a later part of the analysis.
The patient dreamt that _he had received an account from the analyst
in which he was charged interest for delay in payment from the period
September 3rd to 29th. The interest on the total of 315 francs was 1
franc._

Under this reproach of meanness and avariciousness levelled at the
analyst, the patient covered, as analysis proved, a violent unconscious
envy. Diverse things in the life of the analyst can arouse the patient's
envy; one fact here in particular had recently made a marked impression.
His physician had received an addition to the family. The disturbed
relations between the patient and his wife unfortunately does not permit
such an expectation in his case. Hence his ground for envy and invidious
comparisons.

As before, the analysis of 315 produces a separation into 3--1--5. To
three he associates--his doctor has three children, just lately there is
one in addition. He himself would have five children were all living; as
it is he has 3 - 1 = 2 living; for three of the children were stillborn.
The symbolism of the numbers is not exhausted by these associations.

The patient remarks that the period from 3rd to 29th September contains
twenty-six days. His next thought is to add this and the other figures
of the dream:

     26
    315
      1
    ___
    342
    ___

With 342 he carries out the same operation as on 315, splitting it into
3--4--2. Whereas before it came out that his doctor had three children,
and then had another, and the patient had five, now it runs: the doctor
had three children, and now has four, patient has only two. He remarks
on this that the second figure sounds like a rectification in contrast
with the wish-fulfilment of the first.

The patient, who had discovered this explanation for himself without
my help, declared himself satisfied. His physician, however, was not;
to him it seemed that the above disclosures did not exhaust the rich
possibilities that determined the unconscious images. The patient had,
for instance, added to the figure five that of the stillborn children;
one was born in the 9th month and two in the 7th. He also emphasised the
fact that his wife had had two miscarriages, one in the 5th week and the
other in the 7th. Adding these figures together we get the determination
of the number 26.

                          Child of 7 months
                            "    " 7   "
                            "    " 9   "
                                  __
                                  23   "
    2 miscarriages (5 + 7 weeks)   3   "
                                  __
                                  26   "
                                  __

It seems as if the number twenty-six were determined by the number of
the lost times of pregnancy. This time (twenty-six days) denotes, in the
dream, a delay for which the patient was charged one franc interest.
He has, in fact, suffered a delay through the lost pregnancies, for
his doctor has, during the time the patient has known him, surpassed
him with one child. One franc must be one child. We have already seen
the tendency of the patient to add together all his children, even the
dead ones, in order to outdo his rival. The thought that his physician
had outdone him by one child could easily react immediately upon the
determination of 1. We will therefore follow up this tendency of the
patient and carry on his play with figures, by adding to the figure 26
the two complete pregnancies of nine months each.

    26 + 9 + 9 = 44

If we follow the tendency to split up the numbers we get 2 + 6 and 4 +
4, two groups of figures which have only this in common, that each group
gives 8 by addition. These numbers are, as we must notice, composed
entirely of the months of pregnancy given by the patient. Compare with
them those groups of figures which contain the information as to
the doctor's fecundity, viz. 315 and 342; it is to be noted that the
resemblance lies in their sum-total giving 9 : 9 - 8 = 1. It looks as
if here likewise the notion about the differentiation of 1 were carried
out. As the patient remarked, 315 seems thus a wish-fulfilment, 342 on
the other hand a rectification. An ingenious fancy playing round will
discover the following difference between the two numbers:

    3 × 1 × 5 = 15.      3 × 4 × 2 = 24.      24 - 15 = 9

Here again we come upon the important figure 9, which neatly combines
the reckoning of the pregnancies and births.

It is difficult to say where the borderline of play begins; necessarily
so, for the unconscious product is the creation of a sportive fancy, of
that psychic impulse out of which play itself arises. It is repugnant
to the scientific mind to have serious dealings with this element of
play, which on all sides loses itself in the vague. But it must be never
forgotten that the human mind has for thousands of years amused itself
with just this kind of game; it were therefore nothing wonderful if this
historic past again compelled admission in dream to similar tendencies.
The patient pursues in his waking life similar phantastic tendencies
about figures, as is seen in the fact already mentioned of the
celebration of the 100th birthday. Their presence in the dream therefore
need not surprise us. In a single example of unconscious determination
exact proofs are often lacking, but the sum of our experiences entitles
us to rely upon the accuracy of the individual discoveries. In the
investigation of free creative phantasy we are in the region, almost
more than anywhere else, of broad empiricism; a high measure of
discretion as to the accuracy of individual results is consequently
required, but this in nowise obliges us to pass over in silence what is
active and living, for fear of being execrated as unscientific. There
must be no parleying with the superstition-phobia of the modern mind;
for this itself is a means by which the secrets of the unconscious are
kept veiled.

It is of special interest to see how the problems of the patient are
mirrored in the unconscious of his wife. His wife had the following
dream: She dreamt, and this is the whole dream: "_Luke_ 137." The
analysis of the number gives the following. To 1 she associates: The
doctor has another child. He had three. If all her children were living
she would have 7; now she has only 3 - 1 = 2. But she desires 1 + 3 +
7 = 11 (a twin number, 1 and 1), which expresses her wish that her two
children had been pairs of twins, for then she would have reached the
same number of children as the doctor. Her mother once had twins. The
hope of getting a child by her husband is very precarious; this had
for a long time turned her ideas in the unconscious towards a second
marriage. Other phantasies pictured her as "done with," _i.e._ having
reached the climacteric at 44. She is now 33 years old, therefore in
11 years she will have reached her 44th year. This is an important
period as her father died in his 44th year. Her phantasy of the 44th
year contains the idea of the death of her father. The emphasis on the
death of her father corresponds to the repressed phantasy of the death
of her husband, who is the obstacle to a second marriage. At this place
the material belonging to the dream "_Luke_ 137" comes in to solve the
conflict. The dreamer is, one soon discovers, in no wise well up in her
Bible, she has not read it for an incredible time, she is not at all
religious. It would be therefore quite purposeless to have recourse to
associations here. The dreamer's ignorance of her Bible is so great that
she did not even know that the citation "_Luke_ 137" could only refer to
the Gospel of St. Luke. When she turned up the New Testament she came
to the Acts of the Apostles. As chapter i. has only 26 verses and not
37, she took the 7th verse, "It is not for you to know the times or the
seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power."

But if we turn to Luke i. 37, we find the Annunciation of the Virgin.

Verse 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.

Verse 36. And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a
son in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called
barren.

Verse 37. For with God nothing shall be impossible.

The necessary continuation of the analysis of "_Luke_ 137" demanded the
looking up of Luke xiii. 7, where it says:

Verse 6. A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he
came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.

Verse 7. Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these
three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it
down; why cumbereth it the ground?

The fig-tree, which from antiquity has been a symbol of the male
genital, is to be cut down on account of its unfruitfulness. This
passage is in complete accord with innumerable sadistic phantasies of
the dreamer, concerned with the cutting or biting off of the penis.
The relation to her husband's unfruitful organ is obvious. That she
withdraws her libido from her husband is clear for he is impotent as
regard herself; it is equally clear that she undergoes regression to the
father ("which the father hath put in his own power") and identifies
herself with her mother who had twins.[166] By thus advancing her age
the dreamer places her husband in regard to herself in the position of
a son or boy, of an age at which impotency is normal. Furthermore, the
desire to overcome her husband is easily understood from, and amply
evidenced in her earlier analysis. It is therefore only a confirmation
of what has been already said, if, following up the matter of "_Luke_
137," we find in Luke vii. verse 12, Now when he came nigh to the gate
of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried out, the only son of
his mother, and she was a widow. (13) And when the Lord saw her, he had
compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not. (14) And he came and
touched the bier: and they that bare him stood still. And he said, Young
man, I say unto thee, Arise.

In the particular psychological situation of the dreamer, the allusion
to the resurrection presents a delightful meaning as the cure of her
husband's impotency. Then the whole problem would be solved. There is no
need for me to point out in so many words the numerous wish-fulfilments
contained in this material; they are obvious to the reader.

The important combination of the symbol "_Luke_ 137" must be conceived
as cryptomnesia, since the dreamer is quite unversed in the Bible.
Both Flournoy[167] and myself[168] have already drawn attention to the
important effects of this phenomenon. So far as one can be humanly
certain, the question of any manipulation of the material with intent to
deceive does not come into consideration in this case. Those well posted
in psychoanalysis will be able to allay any such suspicion simply from
the disposition and setting of the material as a whole.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 165: "Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse," 1911, p. 567.
Translator, Dr. M. D. Eder.]

[Footnote 166: The husband's principal conflict is a pronounced
mother-complex.]

[Footnote 167: Flournoy, "Des Indes à la Planète Mars." Idem: "Nouvelles
observations sur un cas de somnambulisme," _Arch. de Pyschol._, vol. I.]

[Footnote 168: See chapter I, p. 86.]




CHAPTER VI

A CRITICISM OF BLEULER'S "THEORY OF SCHIZOPHRENIC NEGATIVISM"[169]


Bleuler's work contains a noteworthy clinical analysis of "Negativism."
Besides giving a very precise and discerning summary of the various
manifestations of negativism, the author presents us with a new
psychological conception well worthy of attention, viz. the concept of
_ambivalency_ and of _ambitendency_, thus formulating the psychological
axiom that every tendency is balanced by its opposite tendency (to this
must be added that positive action is produced by _a comparatively small
leaning to one side of the scale_). Similarly all other tendencies,
under the stress of emotions, are balanced by their opposites--thus
giving an _ambivalent_ character to their expression. This theory rests
on clinical observation of katatonic negativism, which more than proves
the existence of contrasting tendencies and values. These facts are well
known to psychoanalysis, where they are summed up under the concept of
resistance. But this must not be taken as meaning that every positive
psychic action simply calls up its opposite. One may easily gain the
impression from Bleuler's work that his standpoint is that, _cum grano
salis_, the conception or the tendency of the Schizophrenic is always
accompanied by its opposite. For instance, Bleuler says:--

1. "Disposing causes of negativistic phenomena are: the _ambitendency_
by which every impulse is accompanied by its opposite."

2. "_Ambivalency_, which gives two opposed emotional expressions to the
same idea, and would regard that idea as positive and negative at the
same time."

3. "_The schizophrenic splitting_ of the psyche prevents any final
summing up of the conflicting and corresponding psychisms, so that the
unsuitable impulse can be realised just as much as the right one, and
the negative thought substituted for the right one." "On this theory,
negative manifestations may directly arise, since non-selected positive
and negative psychisms may stand for one another," and so on.

If we investigate psychoanalytically a case of obvious ambivalency,
_i.e._ of a more or less unexpected negative reaction instead of a
positive one, we find that there is a strict sequence of psychological
causes conditioning negative reaction. The tendency of this sequence is
to disturb the intention of the contrasting or opposite series, that is
to say, _it is resistance set up by a complex_. This fact, which has not
yet been refuted by any other observations, seems to me to contradict
the above-mentioned formulæ. (For confirmation, see my "Psychology
of Dementia Præcox," p. 103.) Psychoanalysis has proved conclusively
that a resistance always has an intention and a meaning; that there is
no such thing as a capricious playing with contrasts. The systematic
character of resistance holds good, as I believe I have proved, even in
schizophrenia. So long as this position, founded upon a great variety
of experience, is not disproved by any other observations, the theory
of negativism must adapt itself to it. Bleuler in a sense supports this
when he says: "For the most part the negative reaction does not simply
appear as accidental, _but is actually preferred to the right one_."
This is an admission that negativism is of the nature of resistance.
Once admit this, and the primary importance of ambivalency disappears
so far as negativism is concerned. The tendency to resistance remains
as the only fundamental principle. Ambivalency can in no sense be put
on all fours with the "schizophrenic splitting of the psyche," but must
be regarded as a concept which gives expression to the universal and
ever-present inner association of pairs of opposites. (One of the most
remarkable examples of this is the "contrary meaning of root-words."
See Freud's "Essay on Dreams," Jahrbuch, vol. II., p. 179.) The same
thing applies to ambitendency. Neither is specific of schizophrenia, but
applies equally to the neuroses and the normal. All that is specific to
katatonic negativism is _the intentional contrast, i.e. the resistance_.
From this explanation we see that resistance is something different
from ambivalency; it is the dynamic factor which makes manifest the
everywhere latent ambivalency. What is characteristic of the diseased
mind is not ambivalency but resistance. This implies the existence
of a conflict between two opposite tendencies which has succeeded in
raising the normally present ambivalency into a struggle of opposing
components. (Freud has very aptly called this, "The separation of pairs
of opposites.") In other words it is a conflict of wills, bringing about
the neurotic condition of "disharmony within the self." This condition
is the only "splitting of the psyche" known to us, and is not so much
to be regarded as a predisposing cause, but rather as a manifestation
resulting from the inner conflict--the "incompatibility of the complex"
(Riklin).

_Resistance_, as the fundamental fact of schizophrenic dissociation,
thus becomes something which, in contra-distinction to ambivalency, is
not _eo ipso_ identical with the concept of the state of feeling, but
is a secondary and supplementary one, with its own special and _quasi_
independent psychological development; and this is identical with the
necessary previous history of the complex in every case. It follows that
the theory of negativism coincides with the theory of the complex, as
the complex is the cause of the resistance.

Bleuler summarises the causes of negativism as follows:

    (_a_) The autistic retirement of the patient into his own
    phantasies.

    (_b_) The existence of a life-wound (complex) which must be
    protected from injury.

    (_c_) The misconception of the environment and of its meaning.

    (_d_) The directly hostile relation to environment.

    (_e_) The pathological irritability of schizophrenics.

    (_f_) The "press of ideas," and other aggravations of action and
    thought.

    (_g_) Sexuality with its ambivalency on the emotional plane is
    often one of the roots of negative reaction.

       *       *       *       *       *

(_a_) Autistic withdrawal into one's own phantasies[170] is what I
formerly designated as the obvious overgrowth of the phantasies of
the complex. The strengthening of the complex is coincident with the
increase of the resistance.

(_b_) The life-wound (_Lebenswund_) is the complex which, as a matter
of course, is present in every case of schizophrenia, and of necessity
always carries with it the phenomena of autism or auto-erotism
(introversion), for complexes and involuntary egocentricity are
inseparable reciprocities. Points (_a_) and (_b_) are therefore
identical. (_Cf._ "Psychology of Dementia Præcox," chapters ii. and iii.)

(_c_) It is proved that the misconception of environment is an
assimilation of the complex.

(_d_) The hostile relation to environment is the maximum of resistance
as psychoanalysis clearly shows. (_d_) goes with (_a_).

(_e_) "Irritability" proves itself psychoanalytically to be one of the
commonest results of the complex. I designated it _complex-sensibility_.
Its generalised form (if one may use such an expression) manifests
itself as a damming up of the affect (= damming of the _libido_),
consequent on increased resistance. So-called neurasthenia is a
classical example of this.

(_f_) Under the term "press of ideas," and similar intellectual
troubles, may be classified the "want of clearness and logic of the
schizophrenic thinking," which Bleuler considers a predisposing
cause. I have, as I may presume is known, expressed myself with much
reserve on what he regards as the premeditation of the schizophrenic
adjustment. Further and wider experience has taught me that the laws
of the Freudian psychology of dreams and the theory of the neuroses
must be turned towards the obscurities of schizophrenic thinking. _The
painfulness of the elaborated complex necessitates a censorship of its
expression._[171] This principle has to be applied to schizophrenic
disturbance in thinking; and until it has been proved that this
principle is not applicable to schizophrenia, there is no justification
for setting up a new principle; _i.e._ to postulate that schizophrenic
disturbance of ideas is something primary. Investigations of hypnagogic
activity, as well as association reactions in states of concentrated
attention, give psychical results which up to now are indistinguishable
from the mental conditions in schizophrenia. For example excessive
relaxation of attention suffices to conjure up images as like as two
peas to the phantasies and expressions of schizophrenia. It will
be remembered that I have attributed the notorious disturbances of
attention in schizophrenia to the special character of the complex; an
idea which my experience since 1906 have further confirmed. There are
good reasons for believing specific schizophrenic thought-disturbance to
be the _result of a complex_.

Now as regards the symptoms of thought-pressure, it is first and
foremost a thought-compulsion, which, as Freud has shown, is first a
thought-complex and secondly a _sexualisation of the thought_. Then
to the symptom of thought-pressure there is superadded at least a
_demoniac_ impulse such as _may be observed in every vigorous release or
production of libido_.

Thought-pressure, on closer examination, is seen to be a result of
schizophrenic introversion, which necessarily leads to a sexualisation
of the thought; _i.e._ to an autonomy of the complex.[172]

(_g_) _The transition to sexuality_ appears from the psychoanalytical
standpoint difficult to understand. If we consider that the development
of resistance coincides in every case with the history of the
complex we must ask ourselves: Is the complex sexual or not? (It
goes without saying that we must understand sexuality in its proper
sense of psycho-sexuality.) To this question psychoanalysis gives the
invariable answer: _Resistance always springs from a peculiar sexual
development_. The latter leads in the well-known manner to conflict,
_i.e._ to the complex. Every case of schizophrenia which has so far
been analysed confirms this. It can therefore claim at least to be a
working hypothesis, and one to be followed up. In the present state
of our knowledge, it is therefore not easy to see why Bleuler only
allows to sexuality a _quasi_-determining influence on the phenomena of
negativism; for psychoanalysis demonstrates that the cause of negativism
is resistance; and that with schizophrenia, as with all other neuroses,
this arises from the peculiar sexual development.

It can scarcely be doubted to-day that schizophrenia, with its
preponderance of the mechanisms of introversion, possesses the same
mechanism as any other "psycho-neurosis." In my opinion, at any
rate, its peculiar symptoms (apart from the clinical and anatomical
standpoints) are only to be studied by psychoanalysis, _i.e._ when
the investigation is mainly directed to the genetic impetus. I have,
therefore, endeavoured to indicate how Bleuler's hypothesis stands in
the light of the theory of complexes; I feel myself bound to emphasise
the complex-theory in this relation, and am not disposed to surrender
this conception, which is as illuminating as it was difficult to evolve.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 169: "Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und psychopathologische
Forschungen," vol. III. 1912. Translator, Dr. M. D. Eder.]

[Footnote 170: Autism (Bleuler) = Auto-erotism (Freud). For some time I
have employed the concept of _introversion_ for this condition.]

[Footnote 171: Hence the replacing of the complex by its corresponding
symbol.]

[Footnote 172: See "Psychology of Dementia Præcox," chapters iv. and v.]




CHAPTER VII

PSYCHOANALYSIS[173]


Psychoanalysis is not only scientific, but also technical in character;
and from results technical in their nature, has been developed a new
psychological science which might be called "analytical psychology."

Psychologists and doctors in general are by no means conversant
with this particular branch of psychology, owing to the fact that
its technical foundations are as yet comparatively unknown to them.
Reason for this may be found in that the new method is exquisitely
psychological, and therefore belongs neither to the realm of medicine
nor to that of experimental psychology. The medical man has, as a rule,
but little knowledge of psychology; and the psychologist has no medical
knowledge. There is therefore a lack of suitable soil in which to plant
the spirit of this new method. Furthermore, the method itself appears
to many persons so arbitrary that they cannot reconcile it with their
scientific conscience. The conceptions of Freud, the founder of this
method, laid particular stress upon the sexual factor; this fact has
aroused strong prejudice, and many scientific men are repelled merely
by this feeling. I need hardly remark that such an antipathy is not a
logical ground for rejecting a new method. The facts being so, it is
obvious that the psychoanalyst should discuss the principles rather than
the results of his method, when he speaks in public; for he who does not
acknowledge the scientific character of the method cannot acknowledge
the scientific character of its results.

Before I enter into the principles of the psychoanalytic method, I must
mention two common prejudices against it.

The first of these is that psychoanalysis is nothing but a somewhat
deep and complicated form of anamnesis. Now it is well known that the
anamnesis is based upon the evidence supplied by the patient's family,
and upon his own conscious self-knowledge, revealed in reply to direct
questions. The psychoanalyst naturally develops his anamnesic data as
carefully as any other specialist; but this is merely the patient's
history, and must not be confused with analysis. Analysis is the
reduction of an actual conscious content of a so-called accidental
nature, into its psychological determinants. This process has nothing to
do with the anamnesic reconstruction of the history of the illness.

The second prejudice, which is based, as a rule, upon a superficial
knowledge of psychoanalytic literature, is that psychoanalysis is
a method of suggestion, by which a faith or doctrine of living is
imposed upon the patient, thereby effecting a cure in the manner of
mental healing or Christian Science. Many analysts, especially those
who have worked in psychoanalysis for a long time, previously used
therapeutic suggestion, and are therefore familiar with its workings.
They know that the psychoanalyst's method of working is diametrically
opposed to that of the hypnotist. In direct contrast with therapeutic
suggestion, the psychoanalyst does not attempt to force anything upon
his patient which the latter does not see himself, and find reasonable
with his own understanding. Faced with the constant desire on the
part of the neurotic patient to receive suggestions and advice, the
analyst just as constantly endeavours to lead him away from this
passive receptive attitude, and make him use his common sense and
powers of criticism, that equipped with these he may become fitted to
meet the problems of life independently. We have often been accused
of forcing interpretations upon patients, interpretations that were
frequently quite arbitrary in character. I wish that one of these
critics would make the attempt to force such arbitrary interpretations
upon my patients, who are often persons of great intelligence and high
culture, and who are, indeed, not infrequently my own colleagues. The
impossibility of such an undertaking would soon be laid bare. In
psychoanalysis we are dependent upon the patient and his judgment, for
the reason that the very nature of analysis consists in leading him to
a knowledge of his own self. The principles of psychoanalysis are so
entirely different from those of therapeutic suggestion that they are
not comparable.

An attempt has also been made to compare analysis with the reasoning
method of Dubois, which is in itself a rational process. This comparison
does not however hold good, for the psychoanalyst strictly avoids
argument and persuasion with his patients. He must naturally listen to
and take note of the conscious problems and conflicts of his patient,
but not for the purpose of fulfilling his desire to obtain advice or
direction with regard to his conduct. The problems of a neurotic patient
cannot be solved by advice and conscious argument. I do not doubt
that good advice at the right time can produce good results; but I do
not know whence one can obtain the belief that the psychoanalyst can
always give the right advice at the right time. The neurotic conflict
is frequently, indeed as a rule, of such a character that advice cannot
possibly be given. Furthermore, it is well known that the patient only
desires authoritative advice in order that he may cast aside the burden
of responsibility, referring himself and others to the opinion of the
higher authority.

In direct contrast to all previous methods, psychoanalysis endeavours to
overcome the disorders of the neurotic psyche through the subconscious,
not through the conscious self. In this work we naturally have need of
the patient's conscious content, for his subconsciousness can only be
reached _viâ_ the conscious. The material furnished by the anamnesis
is the source from which our work starts. The detailed recital usually
furnishes many valuable clues which make the psychogenic origin of the
symptoms clear to the patient. This work is naturally only necessary
where the patient is convinced that his neurosis is organic in its
origin. But even in those cases where the patient is convinced from the
very first of the psychic nature of his illness, a critical survey
of the history is very advantageous, since it discloses to him a
psychological concatenation of ideas of which he was unaware. In this
manner those problems which need special discussion are frequently
brought to the surface. Work of this kind may occupy many sittings.
Finally the explanation of the conscious material reaches an end, in so
far as neither the patient nor the doctor can add anything to it that
is decisive in character. Under the most favourable circumstances the
end comes with the formulation of the problem which proved itself to be
impossible of solution. Let us take, for instance, the case of a man
who was once well, but who became a neurotic between the age of 35 and
40. His position in life is assured, and he has a wife and children.
Parallel with his neurosis he developed an intense resistance towards
his professional work. He observed that the first symptoms of neurosis
became noticeable when he had to overcome a certain difficulty in regard
to it. Later on his symptoms became aggravated with each successive
difficulty that arose. An amelioration in his neurosis occurred whenever
fortune favoured him in his professional work. The problem that results
from a critical discussion of the anamnesis is as follows:--

The patient is aware that if he could improve his work, the mere
satisfaction that would result could bring about the much-desired
improvement in his neurotic condition. He cannot, however, make his work
more efficient because of his great resistance against it. This problem
cannot be solved by any reasoning process.

Let us take another case. A woman of 40, the mother of four children,
became neurotic four years ago after the death of one of her children.
A new period of pregnancy, followed by the birth of another child,
produced a great improvement in her condition. The patient now lived
in the thought that it would be a great help to her if she could have
yet another child. Believing, however, that this could not happen, she
attempted to devote her energies to philanthropic interests. But she
failed to obtain the least satisfaction from this work. She observed a
distinct alleviation of her complaint whenever she succeeded in giving
real, living interest to any matter, but she felt entirely incapable
of discovering anything that could bring her lasting interest and
satisfaction. It is clear that no process of reasoning can solve this
problem.

Here psychoanalysis must begin with the endeavour to solve the problem
as to what prevents the patient from developing interests above and
beyond her longing for a child.

Since we cannot assume that we know from the very beginning what the
solution of such problems is, we must at this point trust to the clues
furnished us by the individuality of the patient. Neither conscious
questioning nor rational advice can aid us in the discovery of these
clues, for the causes which prevent us from finding them are hidden
from her consciousness. There is, therefore, no clearly indicated path
by which to reach these subconscious inhibitions. The only rule that
psychoanalysis lays down for our guidance in this respect, is to let the
patient speak of that which occurs to him at the moment. The analyst
must observe carefully what the patient says and, in the first instance,
take due note thereof without attempting to force his own opinions upon
him. Thus we observe that the patient whom I first mentioned begins by
talking about his marriage, which we hitherto had reason to regard as
normal. We now learn that he constantly has difficulties with his wife,
and that he does not understand her in the least. This knowledge causes
the physician to remark that the patient's professional work is clearly
not his only problem; but that his conjugal relations are also in need
of revision. This starts a train of thought in which many further ideas
occur to the patient, concerning his married life. Hereupon follow ideas
about the love affairs he had before his marriage. These experiences,
related in detail, show that the patient was always somewhat peculiar
in his more intimate relations with women, and that this peculiarity
took the form of a certain childish egoism. This is a new and surprising
point of view for him, and explains to him many of his misfortunes with
women.

We cannot in every case get so far as this on the simple principle
of letting the patient talk; few patients have their psychic material
so much on the surface. Furthermore, many persons have a positive
resistance against speaking freely about what occurs to them on the
spur of the moment; it is often too painful to tell the doctor whom
perhaps they do not entirely trust; in other cases because apparently
nothing occurs to them, they force themselves to speak of matters about
which they are more or less indifferent. This habit of not talking to
the point by no means proves that patients consciously conceal their
unpleasant contents, for such irrelevant speaking can occur quite
unconsciously. In such cases it sometimes helps the patient if he is
told that he must not force himself, that he must only seize upon the
very first thoughts that present themselves, no matter how unimportant
or ridiculous they may seem. In certain cases even these instructions
are of no use, and then the doctor is obliged to have recourse to other
expedients. One of these is the employment of the association test,
which usually gives excellent information as to the chief momentary
tendencies of the individual.

A second expedient is dream analysis; this is _the real instrument_ of
psychoanalysis. We have already experienced so much opposition to dream
analysis that a brief exposition of its principles is necessary. The
interpretation of dreams, as well as the meaning given to them, is, as
we know, in bad odour. It is not long since that oneirocritics were
practised and believed in; nor is the time long past when even the most
enlightened human beings were entirely under the ban of superstition.
It is therefore comprehensible that our age should still retain a
certain lively fear of those superstitions which have but recently been
partially overcome. To this timidity in regard to superstition, the
opposition to dream analysis is in a large measure due; but analysis is
in no wise to blame for this. We do not select the dream as our object
because we pay it the homage of superstitious admiration, but because it
is a psychic product that is independent of the patient's consciousness.
We ask for the patient's free thoughts, but he gives us little, or
nothing; or at best something forced or irrelevant. Dreams are free
thoughts, free phantasies, they are not forced, and they are psychic
phenomena just as much as thoughts are.

It may be said of the dream that it enters into the consciousness as
a complex structure, the connection between the elements of which is
not conscious. Only by afterwards joining associations to the separate
pictures of the dream, can the origin of these pictures, in certain
recollections of the near and more remote past, be proved. One asks
oneself: "Where have I seen or heard that?" And by the same process of
free association comes the memory that one has actually experienced
certain parts of the dream, some of them yesterday, some at an earlier
date. This is well known, and every one will probably agree to it.
Thus far the dream presents itself, as a rule, as an incomprehensible
composition of certain elements which are not in the first instance
conscious, but which are later recognised by the process of free
association. This might be disputed on the ground that it is an _a
priori_ statement. I must remark, however, that this conception conforms
to the only generally recognised working hypothesis as to the genesis
of dreams, namely, the derivation of the dream from experiences and
thoughts of the recent past. We are, therefore, upon known ground.
Not that certain dream parts have under all circumstances been known
to the individual, so that one might ascribe to them the character of
being conscious; on the contrary, they are frequently, even generally,
unrecognisable. Not until later do we remember having consciously
experienced this or that dream part. We may therefore regard the dream
from this point of view as a product that comes from a subconscious
origin. The technical unfolding of these subconscious sources is a mode
of procedure that has always been instinctively employed. One simply
tries to remember whence the dream parts come. Upon this most simple
principle the psychoanalytic method of solving dreams is based. It
is a fact that certain dream parts are derived from our waking life
and, indeed, from experiences which, owing to their notorious lack of
importance, would frequently have been consigned to certain oblivion,
and were therefore well on their way towards becoming definitely
subconscious. Such dream parts are the results of subconscious
representations (images).

The principles according to which psychoanalysis solves dreams are
therefore exceedingly simple, and have really been known for a long
time. The further procedure follows the same path logically and
consistently. If one spends considerable time over a dream, which
really never happens outside psychoanalysis, one can succeed in finding
more and more recollections for the separate dream parts. It is,
however, not always possible to discover recollections for certain
other parts; and then one must leave them for the time being, whether
one likes it or not. When I speak of "recollections" I naturally do
not mean merely memories of certain concrete experiences, but also of
their inter-related meanings. The collected recollections are known
as the dream material. With this material one proceeds according to a
scientific method that is universally valid. If one has any experimental
material to work up, one compares its separate parts and arranges them
according to their similarities. Exactly the same course is pursued
in dealing with the dream material; one gathers together its common
characteristics, whether these be formal or material. In doing this one
must absolutely get rid of certain prejudices. I have always observed
that the beginner expects to find some tendency or other according
to which he endeavours to mould his material. I have noticed this
particularly in the cases of colleagues who were previously more or
less violent opponents of psychoanalysis, owing to their well-known
prejudices and misunderstandings. When fate willed that I should analyse
them, and they consequently gained at last an insight into the method
of analysis, it was demonstrated that the first mistake which they had
been apt to make in their own psychoanalytic practice was that they
forced the material into accord with their own preconceived opinions;
that is, they allowed their former attitude towards psychoanalysis,
which they were not able to appreciate objectively, but only according
to subjective phantasies, to have its influence upon their material.
If one goes so far as to venture upon the task of examining the dream
material, one must permit no comparison to frighten one away. The
material consists, as a general rule, of very unequal images, from which
it is under some circumstances most difficult to obtain the "tertium
comparationis." I must forego giving you detailed examples of this,
since it is quite impossible to introduce such extensive material into a
lecture.

One pursues, then, the same method in classifying the unconscious
content, as is used everywhere in comparing materials for the purpose
of drawing conclusions from them. One objection has often been made,
namely: why should the dream have a subconscious content at all? This
objection is unscientific in my opinion. Every psychological moment
has its own history. Every sentence that I utter has, besides the
meaning consciously intended by me, a meaning that is historical; and
this last may be entirely different from the conscious meaning. I am
purposely expressing myself somewhat paradoxically. I certainly should
not take it upon myself to explain each sentence according to its
individual-historical meaning. That is easier in the case of larger and
more complex formations. Every one is certainly convinced of the fact
that a poem--in addition to its manifest contents--is also particularly
characteristic of its author, in its form, subject-matter, and the
history of its origin. Whereas the poet gave skilful expression to
a fleeting mood in his song, the historian of literature sees in it
and beyond it, things which the poet would never have suspected. The
analysis which the literary critic makes of the subject-matter furnished
by the poet may be compared with psychoanalysis in its method, even to
the very errors which occur therein. The psychoanalytic method may be
aptly compared with historical analysis and synthesis. Let us assume,
for instance, that we do not understand the meaning of the rite of
baptism as it is practised in our churches to-day. The priest tells
us that baptism means the reception of the child into the Christian
community. But we are not satisfied with this. Why should the child be
sprinkled with water, etc.? In order that we may understand this rite we
must gather together materials for comparison from the history of the
rite, that is, from the memories of mankind appertaining to it; and this
must be done from various points of view.

Firstly--Baptism is clearly a rite of initiation, a consecration.
Therefore those memories, above all, must be assembled which preserve
the rites of initiation.

Secondly--The act of baptism is performed with water. This especial form
of procedure proves the necessity of welding together another chain of
memories concerning rites in which water was used.

Thirdly--The child is sprinkled with water when it is christened. In
this case we must gather together all the forms of the rite, where the
neophyte is sprinkled or where the child is submerged, etc.

Fourthly--We must recollect all the reminiscences in mythology and
all the superstitious customs which are in any respect similar to the
symbolic act of baptism.

In this manner we obtain a comparative study of the act of baptism.
Thus we ascertain the elements from which baptism is derived; we
further ascertain its original meaning, and at the same time make the
acquaintance of a world rich in religious mythology, which makes clear
to us all the multifarious and derived meanings of the act of baptism.
Thus the analyst deals with the dream. He gathers together historical
parallels for each dream part, even though they be very remote and
attempts to construct the psychological history of the dream and the
meanings that underlie it. By this monographic elaboration of the
dream one gains, exactly as in the analysis of the act of baptism, a
deep insight into the wonderfully subtle and significant network of
subconscious determinations; an insight which, as I have said, can only
be compared with the historical understanding of an act that we used
only to consider from a very one-sided and superficial point of view.

I cannot disguise the fact that in practice, especially at the beginning
of an analysis, we do not in all cases make complete and ideal analyses
of dreams, but that we more generally continue to gather together the
dream associations until the problem which the patient hides from us
becomes so clear that even he can recognize it. This problem is then
subjected to conscious elaboration until it is cleared up as far as
possible, and once again we stand before a question that cannot be
answered.

You will now ask what course is to be pursued when the patient does not
dream at all; I can assure you that hitherto all patients, even those
who claimed never to have dreamed before, began to dream when they
went through analysis. But on the other hand it frequently occurs that
patients who began by dreaming vividly are suddenly no longer able to
remember their dreams. The empirical and practical rule, which I have
hitherto regarded as binding, is that the patient, if he does not dream,
has sufficient conscious material, which he keeps back for certain
reasons. A common reason is: "I am in the doctor's hands and am quite
willing to be treated by him. But the doctor must do the work, I shall
remain passive in the matter."

Sometimes the resistances are of a more serious character. For
instance, persons who cannot admit certain morally grave sides to
their characters, project their deficiencies upon the doctor by calmly
presuming that he is more or less deficient morally, and that for this
reason they cannot communicate certain unpleasant things to him. If,
then a patient does not dream from the beginning or ceases to dream he
retains material which is susceptible of conscious elaboration. Here the
personal relation between the doctor and his patient may be regarded
as the chief hindrance. It can prevent them both, the doctor as well
as the patient, from seeing the situation clearly. We must not forget
that, as the doctor shows, and must show, a searching interest in the
psychology of his patient, so, too, the patient, if he has an active
mind, gains some familiarity with the psychology of the doctor and
assumes a corresponding attitude towards him. Thus the doctor is blind
to the mental attitude of the patient to the exact extent that he does
not see himself and his own subconscious problems. Therefore I maintain
that a doctor must be analysed before he practises analysis. Otherwise
the practice of analysis can easily be a great disappointment to him,
because he can, under certain circumstances, reach a point where further
progress is impossible, a situation which may make him lose his head.
He is then readily inclined to assume that psychoanalysis is nonsense,
so as to avoid the admission that he has run his vessel ashore. If you
are sure of your own psychology you can confidently tell your patient
that he does not dream because there is still conscious material to be
disposed of. I say that one must be sure of one's self in such cases,
for the opinions and unsparing criticisms to which one sometimes has to
submit, can be excessively disturbing to one who is unprepared to meet
them. The immediate consequence of such a loss of personal balance on
the part of the doctor is that he begins to argue with his patient, in
order to maintain his influence over him; and this, of course, renders
all further analysis impossible.

I have told you that, in the first instance, dreams need only be used
as sources of material for analysis. At the beginning of an analysis it
is not only unnecessary, but also unwise, to make a so-called complete
interpretation of a dream; for it is very difficult indeed to make a
complete and really exhaustive interpretation. The interpretations of
dreams that one sometimes reads in psychoanalytic publications are often
one-sided, and not infrequently contestable formulations. I include
among these certain one-sided sexual reductions of the Viennese school.
In view of the comprehensive many-sidedness of the dream material one
must beware, above all, of one-sided formulations. The many-sidedness of
the meaning of a dream, not its singleness of meaning, is of the utmost
value, especially at the beginning of the psychoanalytic treatment.
Thus, for instance, a patient had the following dream not long after her
treatment had begun: "_She was in a hotel in a strange city. Suddenly
a fire broke out; and her husband and her father, who were with her,
helped her in the work of saving others._" The patient was intelligent,
extraordinarily sceptical, and absolutely convinced that dream analysis
was nonsense. I had difficulty in inducing her to give dream analysis
even one trial. Indeed I saw at once that I could not inform my patient
of the real content of the dream under these circumstances because
her resistances were much too great. I selected the fire, the most
conspicuous occurrence of the dream, as the starting point for obtaining
her free associations. The patient told me that she had recently read
in a newspaper that a certain hotel in Z. had been burnt down; that she
remembered the hotel because she had once lived in it. At the hotel
she had made the acquaintance of a man, and from this acquaintance a
somewhat questionable love affair developed. In connection with this
story the fact came out that she had already had quite a number of
similar adventures, all of which had a certain frivolous character.
This important bit of past history was brought out by the first free
association with a dream-part. It would have been impossible in this
case to make clear to the patient the very striking meaning of the
dream. With her frivolous mental attitude, of which her scepticism was
only a special instance, she could have calmly repelled any attempt of
this kind. But after the frivolity of her mental attitude was recognised
and proved to her, by the material that she herself had furnished, it
was possible to analyse the dreams which followed much more thoroughly.

It is, therefore, advisable in the beginning to make use of dreams for
the purpose of reaching the important subconscious material by means
of the patient's free associations in connection with them. This is
the best and most cautious method, especially for those who are just
beginning to practise analysis. An arbitrary translation of the dreams
is absolutely unadvisable. That would be a superstitious practice based
on the acceptance of well-established symbolic meanings. But there
are no fixed symbolic meanings. There are certain symbols that recur
frequently, but we are not able to get beyond general statements. For
instance, it is quite incorrect to assume that the snake, when it
appears in dreams, has a merely phallic meaning; just as incorrect
as it is to deny that it may have a phallic meaning in some cases.
Every symbol has more than one meaning. I can therefore not admit the
correctness of exclusively sexual interpretations, such as appear in
some psychoanalytic publications, for my experience has made me regard
them as one-sided and therefore insufficient. As an example of this I
will tell you a very simple dream of a young patient of mine. It was as
follows: "_I was going up a flight of stairs with my mother and sister.
When we reached the top I was told that my sister was soon to have a
child._"

I shall now show you how, on the strength of the hitherto prevailing
point of view, this dream may be translated so that it receives a sexual
meaning. We know that the incest phantasy plays a prominent part in
the life of a neurotic. Hence the picture "with my mother and sister"
might be regarded as an allusion in this direction. The "stairs" have a
sexual meaning that is supposedly well established; they represent the
sexual act because of the rhythmic climbing of steps. The child that
my patient's sister is expecting is nothing but the logical result of
these premises. The dream, translated thus, would be a clear fulfilment
of infantile desires which as we know play an important part in Freud's
theory of dreams.

Now I have analysed this with the aid of the following process of
reasoning: If I say that the stairs are a symbol for the sexual act,
whence do I obtain the right to regard the mother, the sister, and the
child as concrete; that is, as not symbolic? If, on the strength of
the claim that dream pictures are symbolic, I give to certain of these
pictures the value of symbols, what right have I to exempt certain other
dream parts from this process? If, therefore, I attach symbolic value
to the ascent of the stairs, I must also attach a symbolic value to the
pictures that represent the mother, the sister, and the child. Therefore
I did not translate the dream, but really analysed it. The result was
surprising. I will give you the free associations with the separate
dream-parts, word for word, so that you can form your own opinions
concerning the material. I should state in advance that the young man
had finished his studies at the university a few months previously; that
he found the choice of a profession too difficult to make; and that he
thereupon became a neurotic. In consequence of this he gave up his work.
His neurosis took, among other things, a decidedly homosexual form.

The patient's associations with his mother are as follows: "I have not
seen her for a long time, a very long time. I really ought to reproach
myself for this. It is wrong of me to neglect her so." "Mother," then,
stands here for something which is neglected in an inexcusable manner. I
said to the patient: "What is that?" And he replied, with considerable
embarrassment, "My work."

With his sister he associated as follows: "It is years since I have seen
her. I long to see her again. Whenever I think of her I recall the time
when I took leave of her. I kissed her with real affection; and at that
moment I understood for the first time what love for a woman can mean."
It is at once clear to the patient that his sister represents "love for
woman."

With the stairs he has this association: "Climbing upwards; getting to
the top; making a success of life; being grown up; being great." The
child brings him the ideas: "New born; a revival; a regeneration; to
become a new man."

One only has to hear this material in order to understand at once that
the patient's dream is not so much the fulfilment of infantile desires,
as it is the expression of biological duties which he has hitherto
neglected because of his infantilism. Biological justice, which is
inexorable, sometimes compels the human being to atone in his dreams for
the duties which he has neglected in real life.

This dream is a typical example of the prospective and teleological
function of dreams in general, a function that has been especially
emphasised by my colleague Dr. Maeder. If we adhered to the
one-sidedness of sexual interpretation, the real meaning of the dream
would escape us. Sexuality in dreams is, in the first instance, a means
of expression, and by no means always the meaning and the object of
the dream. The unfolding of the prospective or teleological meaning
of dreams is of particular importance as soon as analysis is so far
advanced that the eyes of the patient are more easily turned upon the
future, than upon his inner life and upon the past.

In connection with the application of symbolism, we can also learn from
the example furnished us by this dream, that there can be no fixed and
unalterable dream symbols, but at best a frequent repetition of fairly
general meanings. So far as the so-called sexual meaning of dreams,
in particular, is concerned, my experience has led me to lay down the
following practical rules:

If dream analysis at the beginning of the treatment shows that the
dream has an undoubted sexual meaning, this meaning is to be taken
realistically; that is, it is proved thereby that the sexual problem
itself must be subjected to a careful revision. If, for instance, an
incest phantasy is clearly shown to be a latent content of the dream,
one must subject the patient's infantile relations towards his parents
and his brothers and sisters, as well as his relations towards other
persons who are fitted to play the part of his father or mother in his
mind, to a careful examination on this basis. But if a dream that comes
in a later stage of the analysis has, let us say, an incest phantasy
as its essential content, a phantasy that we have reason to consider
disposed of, concrete value must not be attached to it under all
circumstances; it must be regarded as symbolic. In this case symbolic
value, not concrete value, must be attached to the sexual phantasy. If
we did not go beyond the concrete value in this case, we should keep
reducing the patient to sexuality, and this would arrest the progress of
the development of his personality. The patient's salvation is not to be
found by thrusting him back again into primitive sexuality; this would
leave him on a low plane of civilisation whence he could never obtain
freedom and complete restoration to health. Retrogression to a state of
barbarism is no advantage at all for a civilised human being.

The above-mentioned formula, according to which the sexuality of a
dream is a symbolic or analogous expression, naturally also holds good
in the case of dreams occurring in the beginning of an analysis. But the
practical reasons that have induced us not to take into consideration
the symbolic value of this sexual phantasy, owe their existence to the
fact that a genuine realistic value must be given to the abnormal sexual
phantasies of a neurotic, in so far as the latter suffers himself to be
influenced in his actions by these phantasies. Experience teaches us
that these phantasies not only hinder him from adapting himself suitably
to his situation, but that they also lead him to all manner of really
sexual acts, and occasionally even to incest. Under these circumstances,
it would be of little use to consider the symbolic content of the dream
only; the concrete content must first be disposed of.

These arguments are based upon a different conception of the dream
from that put forward by Freud; for, indeed, my experience has forced
me to a different conception. According to Freud, the dream is in its
essence a symbolic veil for repressed desires which are in conflict
with the ideals of the personality. I am obliged to regard the dream
structure from a different point of view. The dream for me is, in the
first instance, the subliminal picture of the psychological condition
of the individual in his waking state. It presents a _résumé_ of the
subliminal association material which is brought together by the
momentary psychological situation. The volitional meaning of the
dream which Freud calls the repressed desire, is, for me, essentially
a means of expression. The activity of the consciousness, speaking
biologically, represents the psychological effort which the individual
makes in adapting himself to the conditions of life. His consciousness
endeavours to adjust itself to the necessities of the moment, or, to put
it differently: there are tasks ahead of the individual, which he must
overcome. In many cases the solution is unknown; and for this reason the
consciousness always tries to find the solution by the way of analogous
experience. We always try to grasp what is unknown and in the future,
according to our mental understanding of what has gone before. Now we
have no reasons for assuming that the unconscious follows other laws
than those which apply to conscious thought. The unconscious, like the
conscious, gathers itself about the biological problems and endeavours
to find solutions for these by analogy with what has gone before, just
as much as the conscious does. Whenever we wish to assimilate something
that is unknown, we arrive at it by a process of comparison. A simple
example of this is the well-known fact that, when America was discovered
by the Spaniards, the Indians took the horses of the conquerors, which
were strange to them, for large pigs, because pigs were familiar to
their experience. This is the mental process which we always employ in
recognising unknown things; and this is the essential reason for the
existence of symbolism. It is a process of comprehension by means of
analogy. The apparently repressed desires, contained in the dream, are
volitional tendencies which serve as language-material for subconscious
expression. So far as this particular point is concerned, I am in full
accord with the views of Adler, another member of Freud's school. With
reference to the fact that subconscious materials of expression are
volitional elements or tendencies, I may say that this is dependent
upon the archaic nature of dream thinking, a problem with which I have
already dealt in previous researches.[174]

Owing to our different conception of the structure of the dream, the
further course of analysis also gains a different complexion from
that which it had until now. The symbolic valuation given to sexual
phantasies in the later stages of analysis necessarily leads less to the
reduction of the patient's personality into primitive tendencies, than
to the extension and further development of his mental attitude; that
is, it tends to make his thinking richer and deeper, thus giving him
what has always been one of the most powerful weapons that a human being
can have in his struggle to adapt himself to life. By following this new
course logically, I have come to the conclusion that these religious
and philosophical motive forces--the so-called metaphysical needs of
the human being--must receive positive consideration at the hands of
the analyst. Though he must not destroy the motive forces that underlie
them, by reducing them to their primitive, sexual roots, he must make
them serve biological ends as psychologically valuable factors. Thus
these instincts assume once more those functions that have been theirs
from time immemorial.

Just as primitive man was able, with the aid of religious and
philosophical symbol, to free himself from his original state, so, too,
the neurotic can shake off his illness in a similar way. It is hardly
necessary for me to say, that I do not mean by this, that the belief in
a religious or philosophical dogma should be thrust upon the patient; I
mean simply that he has to reassume that psychological attitude which,
in an earlier civilisation, was characterised by the living belief in
a religious or philosophical dogma. But the religious-philosophical
attitude does not necessarily correspond to the belief in a dogma. A
dogma is a transitory intellectual formulation; it is the result of
the religious-philosophical attitude, and is dependent upon time and
circumstances. This attitude is itself an achievement of civilization;
it is a function that is exceedingly valuable from a biological point
of view, for it gives rise to the incentives that force human beings to
do creative work for the benefit of a future age, and, if necessary, to
sacrifice themselves for the welfare of the species.

Thus the human being attains the same sense of unity and totality, the
same confidence, the same capacity for self-sacrifice in his conscious
existence that belongs unconsciously and instinctively to wild animals.
Every reduction, every digression from the course that has been laid
down for the development of civilisation does nothing more than turn
the human being into a crippled animal; it never makes a so-called
natural man of him. My numerous successes and failures in the course of
my analytic practice have convinced me of the invariable correctness of
this psychological orientation. We do not help the neurotic patient by
freeing him from the demand made by civilisation; we can only help him
by inducing him to take an active part in the strenuous task of carrying
on the development of civilisation. The suffering which he undergoes in
performing this duty takes the place of his neurosis. But, whereas the
neurosis and the complaints that accompany it are never followed by the
delicious feeling of good work well done, of duty fearlessly performed,
the suffering that comes from useful work, and from victory over real
difficulties, brings with it those moments of peace and satisfaction
which give the human being the priceless feeling that he has really
lived his life.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 173: Reprinted from the _Transactions of the Psycho-Medical
Society_, August 5th, 1913.]

[Footnote 174: See "Psychology of the Unconscious."]




CHAPTER VIII

ON PSYCHOANALYSIS[175]


After many years' experience I now know that it is extremely difficult
to discuss psychoanalysis at public meetings and at congresses. There
are so many misconceptions of the matter, so many prejudices against
certain psychoanalytic views, that it becomes an almost impossible task
to reach mutual understanding in public discussion. I have always found
a quiet conversation on the subject much more useful and fruitful than
heated discussions _coram publico_. However, having been honoured by
an invitation from the Committee of this Congress as a representative
of the psychoanalytic movement, I will do my best to discuss some of
the fundamental theoretical conceptions of psychoanalysis. I must limit
myself to this part of the subject because I am quite unable to place
before my audience all that psychoanalysis means and strives for, all
its various applications, its psychology, its theoretical tendencies,
its importance for the realm of the so-called "Geisteswissenschaften,"
_e.g._ Mythology, Comparative Religion, Philosophy, &c. But if I am to
discuss certain theoretical problems fundamental to psychoanalysis, I
must presuppose my audience to be well acquainted with the development
and main results of psychoanalytic researches. Unfortunately, it often
happens that people believe themselves entitled to judge psychoanalysis
who have not even read the literature. It is my firm conviction that no
one is competent to form a judgment concerning the subject until he has
studied the fundamental works on psychoanalysis.

In spite of the fact that Freud's theory of neurosis has been worked out
in great detail, it cannot be said to be, on the whole, very clear or
easily accessible. This justifies my giving you a very short abstract
of his fundamental views concerning the theory of neurosis.

You are aware that the original theory that hysteria and the related
neuroses take their origin in a trauma or shock of sexual character
in early childhood, was given up about fifteen years ago. It soon
became obvious that the sexual trauma could not be the real cause of
a neurosis, since trauma is found so universally; there is scarcely a
human being who has not had some sexual shock in early youth, and yet
comparatively few have incurred a neurosis in later life. Freud himself
soon became aware that several of the patients who related an early
traumatic event, had only invented the story of a so-called trauma; it
had never taken place in reality, and was a mere creation of phantasy.
Moreover, on further investigation it became quite obvious that even
a trauma which had actually occurred was not always responsible for
the whole of the neurosis, although it does sometimes look as if the
structure of the neurosis depended entirely upon the trauma. If a
neurosis were the inevitable consequence of a trauma it would be quite
incomprehensible why neurotics are not incomparably more numerous.

This apparently heightened shock-effect was clearly based upon the
_exaggerated and morbid phantasy_ of the patient. Freud also saw that
this same phantasy manifested itself in relatively early bad habits,
which he called infantile perversities. His new conception of the
ætiology of a neurosis was based upon this further understanding and
traced the neurosis back to some sexual activity in early infancy; this
conception led on to his recent view that the neurotic is "fixed" to a
certain period of his early infancy, because he still seems to preserve
some trace of it, direct or indirect, in his mental attitude. Freud
also makes the attempt to classify or to differentiate the neuroses,
including dementia præcox, according to the stage of the infantile
development in which the fixation took place.

From the standpoint of this theory, the neurotic appears to be entirely
dependent upon his infantile past, and all his troubles in later
life, his moral conflicts, and deficiencies, seem to be derived
from the powerful influence of that period. The therapy and its main
preoccupation are in full accord with this view, and are chiefly
concerned with the unravelling of this infantile fixation, which is
understood as an unconscious attachment of the sexual libido to certain
infantile phantasies and habits.

This is, so far as I can see, the essence of Freud's theory. But this
conception neglects the following important question: What is the cause
of this fixation of the libido to the old infantile phantasies and
habits? We have to remember that almost all persons have at some time
had infantile phantasies and habits exactly corresponding to those
of a neurotic, but they do not become fixed to them; consequently,
they do not become neurotic later on. The ætiological secret of the
neurosis, therefore, does not consist in the mere _existence_ of
infantile phantasies, but lies in the so-called _fixation_. The manifold
statements of the existence of infantile sexual phantasies in neurotic
cases are worthless, in so far as they attribute an ætiological value
to them, for the same phantasies can be found in normal individuals as
well, a fact which I have often proved. It is only the fixation which
seems to be characteristic. It is important to demand the nature of
the proofs of the real existence of this infantile fixation. Freud, an
absolutely sincere and thorough empiricist, would never have evolved
this hypothesis had he not had sufficient grounds for it. The grounds
are found in the results of the psychoanalytic investigations of the
unconscious. Psychoanalysis discloses the unconscious existence of
manifold phantasies, which have their end root in the infantile past
and turn around the so-called "_Kern-complex_," or nucleus-complex,
which may be designated in male individuals as the Œdipus-complex
and in females as the Electra-complex. These terms convey their own
meaning exactly. The whole tragic fate of Œdipus and Electra took place
within the narrow confines of the family, just as the child's fate
lies wholly within the family boundaries. Hence the Œdipus conflict is
very characteristic of an infantile conflict, so also is the Electra
conflict. The existence of these conflicts in infancy is largely
proven by means of psychoanalytic experience. It is in the realm of
this complex that the fixation is supposed to have taken place. Through
the highly potent and effective existence of the nucleus-complex in
the unconscious of neurotics, Freud was led to the hypothesis, that
the neurotic has a peculiar fixation or attachment to it. Not the mere
existence of this complex--for everybody has it in the unconscious--but
the very strong attachment to it is what is typical of the neurotic.
He is far more influenced by this complex than the normal person; many
examples in confirmation of this statement will be found in every one of
the recent psychoanalytic histories of neurotic cases.

We must admit that this conception is a very plausible one, because
the hypothesis of fixation is based upon the well-known fact, that
certain periods of human life, and particularly infancy, do sometimes
leave determining traces for ever. The only question is whether this
principle is a sufficient explanation or not. If we examine persons who
have been neurotic from infancy it seems to be confirmed, for we see
the nucleus-complex as a permanent and powerful activity throughout
the whole life. But if we take cases which never show any considerable
traces of neurosis except at the particular time when they break down,
and there are many such, this principle becomes doubtful. If there
is such a thing as fixation, it is not permissible to base upon it a
new hypothesis, claiming that at times during certain epochs of life
the fixation becomes loosened and ineffective, while at others it
suddenly becomes strengthened and effective. In such cases we find the
nucleus-complex as active and as potent as in those which apparently
support the theory of fixation. Here a critical attitude is peculiarly
justifiable, when we consider the often-repeated observation that the
moment of the outbreak of the disease is by no means indifferent; as a
rule it is most critical. It usually occurs _at the moment when a new
psychological adjustment, that is, a new adaptation, is demanded_. Such
moments facilitate the outbreak of a neurosis, as every experienced
neurologist knows. This fact seems to me extremely significant. If
the fixation were indeed real we should expect to find its influence
constant, _i.e._ a neurosis continuous throughout life. This is
obviously not the case. The psychological determination of a neurosis
is only partially due to an early infantile predisposition; it is due
to a certain actual cause as well. And if we carefully examine the kind
of infantile phantasies and events to which the neurotic individual
is attached, we shall be obliged to agree that there is nothing in
them specific for neurosis. Normal individuals have pretty much the
same kind of internal and external experiences, and are attached to
them to an even astonishing degree, without developing a neurosis.
You will find primitive people, especially, very much bound to their
infantility. It now begins to look as if this so-called fixation were
a normal phenomenon, and that the importance of infancy for the later
mental attitude is natural and prevails everywhere. The fact that the
neurotic seems to be markedly influenced by his infantile conflicts,
shows that it is less a matter of fixation than of a peculiar use which
he makes of his infantile past. It looks as if he exaggerated its
importance, and attributed a very great artificial value to it (Adler,
a pupil of Freud's, expresses a very similar view). It would be unjust
to say that Freud confined himself to the hypothesis of fixation; he
also was conscious of the impression I have just discussed. He called
this phenomenon of reactivation or secondary exaggeration of infantile
reminiscences "regression." But in Freud's conception it appears as
if the incestuous desires of the Œdipus-complex were the real cause
of the regression to infantile phantasies. If this were the case,
we should have to postulate an unexpected intensity of the primary
incestuous tendencies. This view led Freud to his recent comparison
between the so-called psychological "incest-barrier" in children and
the "incest-taboo" in primitive man. He supposes that a real incestuous
desire has led the primitive man to the invention of a protective law;
while to me it looks as if the incest-taboo is one among numerous taboos
of all sorts, and due to the typical superstitious fear of primitive
man, a fear existing independently of incest and its interdiction. I am
able to attribute as little particular strength to incestuous desires in
childhood as in primitive humanity. I do not even seek the reason for
regression in primary incestuous or any other sexual desires. I must
state that a purely sexual ætiology of neurosis seems to me much too
narrow. I base this criticism upon no prejudice against sexuality, but
upon an intimate acquaintance with the whole problem.

Therefore I suggest that the psychoanalytic theory should be liberated
from the purely sexual standpoint. In place of it I should like to
introduce an _energic view-point_ into the psychology of neurosis.

All psychological phenomena can be considered as manifestations of
energy, in the same way as all physical phenomena are already understood
as energic manifestations since Robert Mayer discovered the law of the
conservation of energy. This energy is subjectively and psychologically
conceived as _desire_. I call it _libido_, using the word in the
original meaning of this term, which is by no means only sexual.
Sallustius applies the term exactly in the way we do here: "_Magis in
armis et militaribus equis, quam in scortis et conviviis libidinem
habebant._"

From a broader standpoint libido can be understood as vital energy in
general, or as Bergson's _élan vital_. The first manifestation of this
energy in the suckling is the instinct of _nutrition_. From this stage
the libido slowly develops through manifold varieties of the act of
sucking into the sexual function. Hence I do not consider the act of
sucking as a sexual act. The pleasure in sucking can certainly not be
considered as sexual pleasure, but as pleasure in nutrition, for it
is nowhere proved that pleasure is sexual in itself. This process of
development continues into adult life and is connected with a constantly
increased adaptation to the external world. Whenever the libido, in
the process of adaptation, meets an obstacle, an accumulation takes
place which normally gives rise to an increased effort to overcome
the obstacle. But if the obstacle seems to be insurmountable, and the
individual renounces the overcoming of it, the stored-up libido makes
a regression. In place of being employed in the increased effort, the
libido now gives up the present task and returns to a former and more
primitive way of adaptation. We meet with the best examples of such
regressions very frequently in hysterical cases where a disappointment
in love or marriage gives rise to the neurosis. There we find the
well-known disturbances of nutrition, resistance against eating,
dyspeptic symptoms of all sorts, etc. In these cases the regressive
libido, turning away from its application to the work of adaptation,
holds sway over the function of nutrition and provokes considerable
disturbance. Such cases are obvious examples of regression. Similar
effects of regression are to be found in cases where there are no
troubles in the function of nutrition, and here we readily find a
regressive revival of reminiscences of a time long past. We find a
revival of the images of the parents, of the Œdipus-complex. Here things
and events of infancy--never before important--suddenly become so. They
are regressively reanimated. Take away the obstacle in the path of life
and this whole system of infantile phantasies at once breaks down and
becomes again as inactive and as ineffective as before. But do not let
us forget that, to a certain extent, it is at work influencing us always
and everywhere. I cannot forbear to mention that this view comes very
near Janet's hypothesis of the substitution of the "parties supérieures"
of a function by its "parties inférieures." I would also remind you of
Claparède's conception of neurotic symptoms as emotional reflexes of a
primitive nature.

Therefore I no longer find the cause of a neurosis in the past, but in
the present. I ask, what is the necessary task which the patient will
not accomplish? The whole list of his infantile phantasies does not give
me any sufficient ætiological explanation, because I know that these
phantasies are only puffed up by the regressive libido, which has not
found its natural outlet into a new form of adjustment to the demands of
life.

You may ask why the neurotic has a special inclination not to accomplish
his necessary tasks. Here let me point out that no living being adjusts
itself easily and smoothly to new conditions. The principle of the
_minimum of effort_ is valid everywhere.

A sensitive and somewhat inharmonious character, as a neurotic always
is, will meet special difficulties and perhaps more unusual tasks in
life than a normal individual, who as a rule has only to follow the
well-established line of an ordinary life. For the neurotic there is
no established way, for his aims and tasks are apt to be of a highly
individual character. He tries to follow the more or less uncontrolled
and half-conscious way of normal people, not fully realizing his own
critical and very different nature, which imposes upon him more effort
than the normal person is required to exert. There are neurotics who
have shown their increased sensitiveness and their resistance against
adaptation in the very first weeks of life, in their difficulty in
taking the mother's breast, and in their exaggerated nervous reactions,
&c. For this portion of a neurotic predisposition it will always be
impossible to find a psychological ætiology, for it is anterior to
all psychology. But this predisposition--you may call it "congenital
sensitiveness" or by what name you like--is the cause of the first
resistances against adaptation. In such case, the way of adaptation
being blocked, the biological energy we call libido does not find its
appropriate outlet or activity and therefore replaces an up-to-date and
suitable form of adaptation by an abnormal or primitive one.

In neurosis we speak of an infantile attitude or the predominance of
infantile phantasies and desires. In so far as infantile impressions
and desires are of obvious importance in normal people they are equally
influential in neurosis, but they have here no ætiological significance,
they are reactions merely, being chiefly secondary and regressive
phenomena. It is perfectly true, as Freud states, that infantile
phantasies determine the form and further development of neurosis, but
this is not ætiology. Even when we find perverted sexual phantasies of
which we can prove the existence in childhood, we cannot consider them
of ætiological significance. A neurosis is not really originated by
infantile sexual phantasies and the same must be said of the sexualism
of neurotic phantasy in general. It is not a primary phenomenon based
upon a perverted sexual disposition, but merely secondary and a
consequence of a failure to apply the stored-up libido in a suitable
way. I realize that this is a very old view, but this does not prevent
its being true. The fact that the patient himself very often believes
that this infantile phantasy is the real cause of the neurosis, does
not prove that he is right in his belief, or that a theory following
the same belief is right either. It may look as if it were so, and I
must confess that indeed very many cases do have that appearance. At all
events, it is perfectly easy to understand how Freud came to this view.
Every one having any psychoanalytic experience will agree with me here.

To sum up: I cannot see the real ætiology of a neurosis in the various
manifestations of infantile sexual development and their corresponding
phantasies. The fact that they are exaggerated and put into the
foreground in neurosis is a consequence of the stored-up energy or
libido. The psychological trouble in neurosis, and neurosis itself,
can be considered _as an act of adaptation that has failed_. This
formulation might reconcile certain views of Janet's with Freud's view,
that a neurosis is--under a certain aspect--an attempt at self-cure; a
view which can be and has been applied to many diseases.

Here the question arises whether it is still advisable to bring to light
all the patient's phantasies by analysis, if we now consider them as
of no ætiological significance. Psychoanalysis hitherto has proceeded
to the unravelling of these phantasies because they were considered to
be ætiologically significant. My altered view concerning the theory
of neurosis does not change the procedure of psychoanalysis. The
technique remains the same. We no longer imagine we are unearthing the
end-root of the disease, but we have to pull up the sexual phantasies
because the energy which the patient needs for his health, that is, for
his adaptation, is attached to them. By means of psychoanalysis the
connexion between the conscious and the libido in the unconscious is
re-established. Thus you restore this unconscious libido to the command
of conscious intention. Only in this way can the formerly split-off
energy become again applicable to the accomplishment of the necessary
tasks of life. Considered from this standpoint, psychoanalysis no longer
appears to be a mere reduction of the individual to his primitive sexual
wishes, but it becomes clear that, if rightly understood, it is a
_highly moral task of immense educational value_.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 175: Paper given before the 17th International Medical
Congress, London, 1913.]




CHAPTER IX

ON SOME CRUCIAL POINTS IN PSYCHOANALYSIS[176]

     CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN DR. JUNG AND DR. LOY APPEARING IN
     "PSYCHOTHERAPEUTISCHE ZEITFRAGEN." PUBLISHED BY DR. LOY, SANATORIUM
     L'ABRI, TERRITET-MONTREUX, SWITZERLAND, 1914.


I

_From Dr. Loÿ._

    12th January, 1913.

What you said at our last conversation was extraordinarily stimulating.
I was expecting you to throw light upon the interpretation of my own
and my patients' dreams from the standpoint of Freud's "Interpretation
of Dreams." Instead, you put before me an entirely new conception: the
dream as a means of re-establishing the moral equipoise, fashioned
in the realm below the threshold of consciousness. That indeed is a
fruitful conception. But still more fruitful appears to me your other
suggestion. You regard the problems of psychoanalysis as much deeper
than I had ever thought: it is no longer merely a question of getting
rid of troublesome pathological symptoms; the analysed person gets to
understand not his anxiety-experiences alone, but his whole self most
completely, and by means of this understanding he can build up and
fashion his whole life anew. But he himself must be the builder, the
Analyst only furnishes him with the necessary tools.

To begin with, I would ask you to consider what justification there is
for the original procedure of Breuer and Freud, now entirely given up
both by Freud himself and by you, but practised by Frank, for instance,
as his only method: I mean "the abreaction of the inhibited effects
under light hypnosis." Why have you given up the cathartic method? More
particularly, has light hypnosis in psychocatharsis a different value
from suggestion during sleep, long customary in treatment by suggestion?
that is, has it only the value which the suggestionist contributes,
or does it claim to possess only the value which the patient's belief
bestows upon it? Or, again, is suggestion in the waking-state equivalent
to suggestion in hypnoidal states? This Bernheim now asserts to be
the case, after having used suggestion for many years exclusively in
hypnosis. You will tell me we must talk of psychoanalysis, not of
suggestion. But I really mean this: is not the _suggestion_, by means of
which the psychocatharsis in the hypnoidal state produces therapeutic
effects, (modified naturally, by the patients' age, etc.) the main
factor in the therapeutic success of the psychocatharsis? Frank, in
his "_Affektstörungen_," says: "these partial adjustments of effect,
suggestibility and suggestion, are almost altogether omitted in the
psychocathartic treatment in light sleep, in so far as the content of
the reproduced presentations is concerned." Is that really true? Frank
himself adds: "How can meditation upon the dreams of youth in itself
lead to the discharge of the stored-up anxiety, whether in hypnoidal
states or under any other conditions? Must one not suppose, with
much greater probability, that the anxiety-states would become more
pronounced through such concentration upon them?" [I have noticed that
myself, and much more than I at all liked.] One does indeed say to the
patient: "First we must stir up, then afterwards comes peace." And it
does come. But does it not come _in spite of the stirring-up process_,
because gradually, by means of frequent talks under light hypnosis, the
patient gets such confidence in the doctor that he becomes susceptible
to direct suggestion, and that produces at first improvement and
finally, cure? I go still further: in an analysis _in the waking-state_,
is not the patient's belief that the _method employed will cure him_,
coupled with his ever-growing trust in the doctor, a main cause of
his cure? And I ask even further: in every systematically carried-out
therapeutic treatment, is not faith in it, trust in the doctor, a main
factor in its success? I will not indeed say the only factor, for one
cannot deny that the physical, dietetic and chemical procedures, when
properly selected, have a real effect in securing a cure, over and above
the obvious effect of their indirect suggestion.


II

_From Dr. Jung._

    28th January, 1913.

With regard to your question as to the applicability of the cathartic
method, the following is my standpoint: every method is good if
it serves its purpose, including every method of suggestion, even
Christian Science, Mental Healing, etc. "_A truth is a truth, when it
works._" It is quite another question whether a scientific physician
can answer for it to his conscience should he sell little bottles of
Lourdes-water because that suggestion is at times very useful. Even
the so-called highly scientific suggestion-therapy employs the wares
of the medicine-man and the exorcising Schaman. And please, why should
it not? The public is not even now much more advanced and continues
to expect miracles from the doctor. And truly those doctors should be
deemed clever--worldly-wise in every respect--who understand the art
of investing themselves with the halo of the medicine-man. Not only
have they the biggest practices--they have also the best results. This
is simply because countless physical maladies (leaving out of count
the neuroses) are complicated and burdened with psychic elements to an
extent scarcely yet suspected. The medical exorcist's whole behaviour
betrays his full valuation of the psychic element when he gives the
patient the opportunity of fixing his faith firmly upon the doctor's
mysterious personality. Thus does he win the sick man's mind, which
henceforth helps him indeed to restore his body also to health. The cure
works best when the doctor really believes in his own formulæ, otherwise
he may be overcome by scientific doubt and so lose the correct,
convincing tone. I, too, for a time practised hypnotic suggestion
enthusiastically. But there befell me three dubious incidents which I
want you to note:--

1. Once there came to me to be hypnotised for various neurotic troubles
a withered peasant-woman of some fifty years old. She was not easy to
hypnotise, was very restless, kept opening her eyes--but at last I did
succeed. When I waked her after about half an hour she seized my hand
and with many words testified to her overflowing gratitude. I said:
"But you are by no means cured yet, so keep your thanks till the end of
the treatment." She: "I am not thanking you for that, but--(blushing
and whispering)--because you have been so _decent_." So she said,
looked at me with a sort of tender admiration and departed. I gazed
long at the spot where she had stood--and asked myself, confounded,
"So decent?"--good heavens! surely she hadn't imagined, somehow or
other.... This glimpse made me suspect for the first time that possibly
the loose-minded person, by means of that notorious feminine (I should
at that time have said "animal") directness of instinct, understood
more about the essence of hypnotism than I with all my knowledge of the
scientific profundity of the text-books. Therein lay my harmlessness.

2. Next came a pretty, coquettish, seventeen-year-old girl with a
harassed, suspicious mother. The young daughter had suffered since early
girlhood from _enuresis nocturna_, which, among other difficulties,
hindered her from going to a boarding-school abroad.

At once I thought of the old woman and her wisdom. I tried to hypnotise
the girl; she laughed affectedly and prevented hypnosis for twenty
minutes. Of course I kept quiet and thought: I know why you laugh; you
have already fallen in love with me, but I will give you proof of my
decency in gratitude for your wasting my time with your challenging
laughter. I succeeded in hypnotising her. Success followed at once. The
enuresis stopped, and I therefore informed the young lady later that,
instead of Wednesday, I would not see her again for hypnosis till the
following Saturday. On Saturday she arrived with a cross countenance,
presaging failure. The enuresis had come back again. I remembered
my wise old woman, and asked: "When did the enuresis return?" She
(unsuspecting), "Wednesday night." I thought to myself, There it is
again, she wants to show me that I simply must see her on Wednesdays
too; not to see me for a whole long week is too much for a tender,
loving heart. But I was quite resolved to give no help to such annoying
romancing, so I said, "To continue the hypnosis would be quite wrong
under these circumstances. We must drop it for quite three weeks, to
give the enuresis a chance to stop. Then come again for treatment." In
my malicious heart I knew I should then be on my holiday and so the
course of hypnotic treatment would come to an end. After the holidays my
_locum tenens_ told me the young lady had been there with the news that
the enuresis had vanished, but her disappointment at not seeing me was
very keen. The old woman was right, thought I.

3. The third case gave my joy in suggestion its death-blow. This was
the manner of it. She was a lady of sixty-five who came stumbling into
the consulting-room with a crutch. She had suffered from pain in the
knee-joint for seventeen years, and this at times kept her in bed for
many weeks. No doctor had been able to cure her, and she had tried
every possible remedy of present-day medicine. After I had suffered the
stream of her narrative to flow over me for some ten minutes, I said,
"I will try to hypnotise you, perhaps that will do you good." She, "Oh
yes, please do!" leaned her head on one side and fell asleep before
ever I said or did anything. She passed into somnambulism and showed
every form of hypnosis you could possibly desire. After half an hour I
had the greatest difficulty in waking her; when at last she was awake
she jumped up: "I am well, I am all right, you have cured me." I tried
to make timid objections, but her praises drowned me. She could really
walk. Then I blushed and said, embarrassed, to my colleagues: "Look!
behold the wondrously successful hypnotic therapy." That day saw the
death of my connection with treatment by suggestion; the therapeutic
praise won by this case shamed and humiliated me. When, a year later, at
the beginning of my hypnotic course, the good old lady returned, this
time with the pain in her back, I was already sunk in hopeless cynicism;
I saw written on her forehead that she had just read the notice of the
re-opening of my clinic in the newspaper, that vexatious romanticism
had provided her with a convenient pain in the back so that she might
have a pretext for seeing me, and again let herself be cured in the same
theatrical fashion. This proved true in every particular.

As you will understand, a man possessed of scientific conscience cannot
endure such cases without embarrassment. There ripened in me the resolve
to renounce suggestion altogether rather than to allow myself passively
to be transformed into a miracle-worker. I wanted to understand what
really went on in the souls of people. It suddenly seemed to me
incredibly childish to think of dispelling an illness with charms, and
that this should be the only result of our scientific endeavours for
a psychotherapy. Thus for me the discovery of Breuer and Freud was a
veritable deliverance. I took up their method with unalloyed enthusiasm
and soon recognised how right Freud was, when at a very early date,
indeed so far back as the _Studien ueber Hysterie_, he began to direct a
searchlight upon the accompanying circumstances of the so-called trauma.
I too soon discovered that certainly some traumata with an obvious
etiological tinge are opportunely present. But the greater number
appeared highly improbable. So many of them seemed so insignificant,
even so normal, that at most one could regard them as just providing
the opportunity for the neurosis to appear. But what especially
spurred my criticism was the fact that so many traumata were simply
inventions of phantasy which had never really existed. This perception
was enough to make me sceptical about the whole trauma-theory. (But I
have dealt with these matters in detail in my lectures on the theory
of psychoanalysis).[177] I could no longer suppose that the hundred
and one cathartic experiences of a phantastically puffed-up or entirely
invented trauma were anything but the effect of suggestion. It is well
enough if it helps. If one only had not a scientific conscience and that
impulsion towards the truth! I found in many cases, especially when
dealing with more mentally gifted patients, that I must recognise the
therapeutic limitations of this method. It is, of course, a definite
plan, and convenient for the doctor, since it makes no particular
demands upon his intellect for new adaptations. The theory and practice
are both of the pleasantest simplicity: "The neurosis is caused by
a trauma. The trauma is abreacted." When the abreaction takes place
under hypnotism, or with other magical accessories (dark room, peculiar
lighting, and the rest), I remember once more the wise old woman,
who opened my eyes not merely to the magic influence of the mesmeric
gestures, but also to the essential character of hypnotism itself. But
what alienated me once for all from this relatively efficacious indirect
method of suggestion, based as it is upon an equally efficacious false
theory, was the perception I obtained at the same time that, behind the
confused deceptive intricacies of neurotic phantasies, there stands a
_conflict_, which may be best described as a _moral_ one. With this
there began for me a new era of understanding. Research and therapy
now coincided in the attempt to discover the causes and the _rational_
solution of this conflict. That is what psychoanalysis meant to me.
Whilst I had been getting this insight, Freud had built up his sexual
theory of the neurosis, and therewith had brought forward an enormous
number of questions for discussion, all of which I thought deserved
the profoundest consideration. Thus I have had the good fortune of
co-operating with Freud for a long time, and working with him in the
investigation of the problem of sexuality in neurosis. You, perhaps,
know from some of my earlier work that I was always dubious somewhat
concerning the significance of sexuality.[178] This has now become the
exact point where I am no longer altogether of Freud's opinion.

I have preferred to answer your questions in rather non-sequent fashion.
Whatever is still unanswered, let me now repeat: _light hypnosis_ and
_complete hypnosis_ are but varying grades of intensity of unconscious
attraction towards the hypnotist. Who can here venture to draw sharp
distinctions? To a critical intelligence it is unthinkable that
suggestibility and suggestion can be excluded in the cathartic method.
They are present everywhere and are universal human attributes, even
with Dubois and the psychoanalysts who think they work on purely
rational lines. _No technique, no self-deception avails here--the
doctor works, nolens volens--and perhaps primarily--by means of his
personality, that is by suggestion._ In the cathartic treatment, what
is of far more importance to the patient than the conjuring up of old
phantasies is the being so often with the doctor, and having confidence
and belief in him personally, and in his method. The belief, the
self-confidence, perhaps also the devotion with which the doctor does
his work, are far more important things to the patient (_imponderabilia_
though they be) than the recalling of old traumata.[179]

Ultimately we shall some day know from the history of medicine
everything that has ever been of service; then perhaps at last we may
come to the really desirable therapy, to psychotherapy. Did not even
the old materia medica of filth have brilliant cures?--cures which only
faded away with the belief in it!

Because I recognise that the patient does attempt to lay hold of the
doctor's personality, in spite of all possible rational safeguards,
I have formulated the demand that the psychotherapeutist shall be
held just as responsible for the cleanness of his own hands as is the
surgeon. I hold it to be an absolutely indispensable preliminary that
the psychoanalyst should himself first undergo an analysis, for his
personality is one of the chief factors in the cure.

Patients read the doctor's character intuitively and they should find in
him a human being, with faults indeed, but also a man _who has striven
at every point_ to _fulfil his own human duties in the fullest sense_. I
think that this is the first healing factor. Many times I have had the
opportunity of seeing that the analyst is successful with his treatment
just in so far as he has succeeded in his own moral development. I think
this answer will satisfy your question.


III

_From Dr. Loÿ._

    2nd February, 1913.

You answer several of my questions in a decidedly affirmative sense. You
take it as proved that in the cures by the cathartic method the main
_rôle_ is played by faith in the doctor and in his method, and not by
the "abreaction" of real or imaginary traumata. I also. Equally I am at
one with your view that the cures of the old materia medica of filth,
as well as the Lourdes cures, or those of the Mental Healers, Christian
Scientists and Persuasionists, are to be attributed to faith in the
miracle-worker, rather than to any of the methods employed.

Now comes the ticklish point: the augur can remain an augur so long
as he himself believes the will of the gods is made manifest by the
entrails of the sacrificial beast. When he no longer believes, he has
to ask himself: Shall I continue to use my augur's authority to further
the welfare of the State, or shall I make use of my newer, and (I hope)
truer convictions of to-day? Both ways are possible. The first is called
opportunism; the second the pursuit of truth, and scientific honour. For
a doctor, the first way brings perhaps therapeutic success and fame;
the second, reproach: such a man is not taken seriously. What I esteem
most highly in Freud and his school is just this passionate desire for
truth. But again, it is precisely here that people pronounce a different
verdict: "It is impossible for the busy practitioner to keep pace with
the development of the views of this investigator and his initiates."
(Frank, "Affektstörungen Einleitung.")

One can easily disregard this little quip, but one must take more
seriously one's self-criticism. We may have to ask ourselves whether,
since science is an undivided, ever-flowing stream, we are justified
in relinquishing on conscientious grounds any method or combination of
methods by means of which we know cures can be achieved?

Looking more closely at the fundamental grounds of your aversion to
the use of hypnosis (or semi-hypnosis, the degree matters nothing) in
_treatment by suggestion_, (which as a matter of fact every doctor
and every therapeutic method makes use of willy-nilly, no matter what
it is called), it is clear that what has disgusted you in hypnotism
is at bottom nothing but the so-called "transference" to the doctor,
which you, with your unalloyed psychoanalytic treatment, can get rid
of as little as any one else, for indeed it plays a chief part in the
success of the treatment. Your insistence that the psychoanalyst must
be answerable for the cleanness of his own hands--(here I agree with
you unreservedly)----is an inevitable conclusion. But, after all, does
anything more "augurish" really cling to the use made of hypnosis in
psychotherapeutic treatment, than to the quite inevitable use made of
the "transference to the doctor" for therapeutic ends? In either case
we must perforce "take shares" in faith as a healing agent. As for the
feeling which the patient--whether man or woman--entertains for the
doctor, is there never anything in the background save conscious or
unconscious sexual desire? In many cases your view is most certainly
correct; more than one woman has been frank enough to confess that
the beginning of hypnosis was accompanied by voluptuous pleasure.
But this is not true in all instances--or how would you explain the
underlying feeling in the hypnotising of one animal by another, _e.g._
snake and bird? Surely you can say that there the feeling of _fear_
reigns, fear which is an inversion of the libido, such as comes upon
the bride in that hypnoidal state before she yields to her husband
wherein pure sexual desire rules, though possibly it contains an
element of fear. However this may be, from your three cases I cannot
draw any ethical distinction between the "unconscious readiness towards
the hypnotist" and the "transference to the doctor" which should avail
to condemn a combination of hypnotism and psychoanalysis as a method
of treatment. You will ask why I cling to the use of hypnotism; or
rather of hypnoidal states. Because I think there are cases that can be
much more rapidly cured thereby, than through a purely psychoanalytic
treatment. For example, in no more than five or six interviews I cured
a fifteen-year-old girl who had suffered from _enuresis nocturna_ from
infancy, but was otherwise thoroughly healthy, gifted, and pre-eminent
at school: she had previously tried all sorts of treatment without any
result.

Perhaps I ought to have sought out the psychoanalytic connexion between
the enuresis and her psychosexual attitude and explained it to her,
etc., but I could not, she had only the short Easter holidays for
treatment: so I just hypnotised her and the tiresome trouble vanished.
It was a lasting cure.

In psychoanalysis I use hypnosis to help the patient to overcome
"resistances."

Further, I use light hypnosis in association with psychoanalysis, to
hasten the advance when the "re-education" stage comes.

For example, a patient afflicted with washing-mania was sent to me after
a year's psychocathartic treatment by Dr. X. The symbolic meaning of
her washing-ceremonial was first made plain to her; she became more and
more agitated during the "abreaction" of alleged traumata in childhood,
because she had persuaded herself by auto-suggestion that she was too
old to be cured, that she saw no "images," etc. So I used hypnosis
to help her to diminish the number of her washings, "so that the
anxiety-feeling would be banished"; and to train her to throw things on
the ground and pick them up again without washing her hands afterwards,
etc.

In view of these considerations, if you feel disposed to go further
into the matter, I should be grateful if you would furnish me with
more convincing reasons why hypnotic treatment must be dispensed with;
and explain how to do without it, or with what to replace it in such
cases. Were I convinced, I would give it up as you have done, but what
convinced you has, so far, not convinced me. _Si duo faciunt idem, non
est idem._

Now I want to consider another important matter to which you alluded,
but only cursorily, and to put one question: behind the neurotic
phantasies there stands, you say, almost always (or always) a moral
conflict which belongs to the present moment. That is perfectly clear
to me. Research and therapy coincide; their task is to search out the
foundations and the rational solution of the conflict. Good. But can
the rational solution always be found? "Reasons of expediency" so often
bar the way, varying with the type of patient, for instance children,
young girls and women from "pious" catholic or protestant families.
Again that accursed opportunism! A colleague of mine was perfectly right
when he began to give sexual enlightenment to a young French patient, a
boy who was indulging in masturbation. Whereupon, like one possessed,
in rushed a bigoted grandmother, and a disagreeable sequel ensued. How
to act in these and similar cases? What to do in cases where there
arises a moral conflict between love and duty (a conflict in married
life)?--or in general between instinct and moral duty? What to do in the
case of a girl afflicted with hysterical or anxiety symptoms, needing
love and having no chance to marry, either because she cannot find a
suitable man or because, being "well-connected," she wants to remain
chaste? Simply try to get rid of the symptoms by suggestion? But that is
wrong as soon as one knows of a better way. How to reconcile these two
consciences: that of the man who does not want to confine his fidelity
to truth within his own four walls; and that of the doctor who must
cure, or if he dare not cure according to his real convictions (owing to
opportunist-motives), must at least procure some alleviation? We live
in the present, but with the ideas and ideals of the future. That is
_our_ conflict. How resolve it?


IV

_From Dr. Jung._

    4th February, 1913.

You have put me in some perplexity by the questions in your yesterday's
letter. You have rightly grasped the spirit which dictated my last. I
am glad you, too, recognise this spirit. There are not very many who
can boast of such tolerance. I should deceive myself if I regarded my
standpoint as that of a practical physician. First and foremost I am
a scientist; naturally that gives me a different outlook upon many
problems. In my last letter I certainly left out of count the doctor's
practical needs, but chiefly that I might show you on what grounds we
might be moved to relinquish hypnotic therapy. To remove the first
objection at once, let me say that I did not give up hypnotism because I
desired to avoid dealing with the basic motives of the human soul, but
rather because I wanted to battle with them _directly_ and _openly_.
When once I understood what kind of forces play a part in hypnotism I
gave it up, simply to get rid of all the indirect advantages of this
method. As we psychoanalysts see regretfully every day--and our patients
also--_we do not work with the "transference to the doctor,"_[180] _but
against it and in spite of it_. It is just not upon the _faith_ of the
sick man that we can build, but upon his _criticism_. So much would I
say at the outset upon this delicate question.

As your letter shows, we are at one in regard to the theoretical aspect
of treatment by suggestion. So we can now apply ourselves to the further
task of coming to mutual understanding about the practical question.

Your remarks on the physician's dilemma--whether to be magician or
scientist--bring us to the heart of the discussion. I strive to be no
fanatic--although there are not a few who reproach me with fanaticism. I
contend not for the application of the psychoanalytic method solely and
at all costs, but for the recognition of every method of investigation
and treatment. I was a medical practitioner quite long enough to realise
that practice obeys, and should obey, other laws than does the search
after truth. One might almost say practice must first and foremost
submit to the laws of opportunism. The scientist does great injustice
to the practitioner if he reproaches him for not using the "one true"
scientific method. As I said to you in my last letter: "A truth is a
truth, when it works." But on the other hand, the practitioner must not
reproach the scientist if in his search for truth and for newer and
better methods, he makes trial of unusual ways. After all, it is not the
practitioner but the investigator, and the latter's patient, who will
have to bear any injury that may arise. The practitioner must certainly
use those methods which he knows how to use to greatest advantage, and
which give him the best relative results. My tolerance, indeed, extends,
as you see, even to Christian Science. But I deem it most uncalled for
that Frank, a practising doctor, should depreciate research in which he
cannot participate, and particularly the very line of research to which
he owes his own method. It is surely time to cease this running down of
every new idea. No one asks Frank and all whom he represents to become
psychoanalysts; we grant them the right to their existence, why should
they always seek to cut ours short?

As my own "cures" show you, I do not doubt the effect of suggestion.
Only I had the idea that I could perhaps discover something still
better. This hope has been amply justified. Not for ever shall it be
said--

    "The good attained is oft of fairer still
    The enemy, calling it vain illusion, falsehood's snare."

I confess frankly were I doing your work I should often be in
difficulties if I relied only on psychoanalysis. I can scarcely imagine
a general practice, especially in a sanatorium, with no other means than
psychoanalysis. At Dr. Bircher's sanatorium in Zürich the principle of
psychoanalysis is adopted completely by several of the assistants, but
a whole series of other important educative influences are also brought
to bear upon the patients, without which matters would probably go very
badly. In my own purely psychoanalytic practice I have often regretted
that I could not avail myself of the other methods of re-education
that are naturally at hand in an institution--this, of course, only
in special cases where one is dealing with extremely uncontrolled,
uneducated persons. Which of us has shown any disposition to assert that
we have discovered a panacea? There are cases in which psychoanalysis
operates less effectively than any other known method. But who has ever
claimed psychoanalysis should be employed in every sort of case, and on
every occasion? Only a fanatic could maintain such a view. Patients for
whom psychoanalysis is suitable have to be selected. I unhesitatingly
send cases I think unsuitable to other doctors. As a matter of fact
this does not happen often, because patients have a way of sorting
themselves out. Those who go to an analyst usually know quite well why
they go to him and not to some one else. However, there are very many
neurotics well suited for psychoanalysis. In these matters every scheme
must be looked at in due perspective. It is never quite wise to try to
batter down a stone wall with your head. Whether simple hypnotism, the
cathartic treatment, or psychoanalysis shall be used, must be determined
by the conditions of the case and the preference of the _particular_
doctor. Every doctor will obtain the best results with the instrument he
knows best.

But, barring exceptions, _I must say definitely that for me, and
for my patients also, psychoanalysis proves itself better than any
other method_. This is not merely a matter of feeling; from manifold
experiences I know many cases can indeed be cured by psychoanalysis
which are refractory to all other methods of treatment. I have many
colleagues whose experience is the same, even men engaged exclusively
in practice. It is scarcely to be supposed that a method altogether
contemptible would meet with so much support.

When once psychoanalysis has been applied in a suitable case, it is
_imperative_ that rational solutions of the conflicts should be found.
The objection is at once advanced that many conflicts are intrinsically
incapable of solution. That view is sometimes taken because only an
external solution is thought of--and that, at bottom, is no real
solution at all. If a man cannot get on with his wife he naturally
thinks the conflict would be solved if he were to marry some one
else. If such marriages are examined they are seen to be no solution
whatsoever. The old Adam enters upon the new marriage and bungles it
just as badly as he did the earlier one. _A real solution comes only
from within, and only then because the patient has been brought to a new
standpoint._

Where an external solution is possible no psychoanalysis is necessary;
in seeking an internal solution we encounter the peculiar virtues of
psychoanalysis. The conflict between "love and duty" must be solved
upon that particular plane of character where "love and duty" are no
longer in opposition, for indeed they really are not so. The familiar
conflict between "instinct and conventional morality" must be solved
in such a way that both factors are taken satisfactorily into account,
and this is only possible through a change of character. This change
psychoanalysis can bring about. In such cases external solutions are
worse than none at all. Naturally the particular situation dictates
which road the doctor must ultimately follow, and what is then his duty.
I regard the conscience-searching question of the doctor's remaining
true to his scientific convictions as rather unimportant in comparison
with the incomparably weightier question as to how he can best help his
patient. The doctor _must_, on occasion, be able to play the augur.
_Mundus vult decipi_--but the cure is no deception. It is true that
there is a conflict between ideal conviction and concrete possibility.
_But we should ill prepare the ground for the seed of the future, were
we to forget the tasks of the present, and sought only to cultivate
ideals._ That is but idle dreaming. Do not forget that Kepler cast
horoscopes for money, and that countless artists have been condemned to
work for wages.


V.

_From Dr. Loÿ._

    9th February, 1913.

The selfsame passion for truth possesses us both when we think of pure
research, and the same desire to cure when we are considering therapy.
For the scientist, as for the doctor, we desire the fullest freedom in
all directions, fullest freedom to select and use the methods which
promise the best fulfilment of their ends at any moment. Here we are at
one; but there remains a postulate we must establish to the satisfaction
of others if we want recognition for our views.

First and foremost there is a question that must be answered, an old
question asked already in the Gospels: _What is Truth?_ I think clear
definitions of fundamental ideas are most necessary. How shall we
contrive a working definition of the conception "Truth"? Perhaps an
allegory may help us.

Imagine a gigantic prism extending in front of the sun, so that its
rays are broken up, but suppose man entirely ignorant of this fact. I
exclude the invisible, chemical and ultra-violet rays. Men who live
in a blue-lit region will say: "The sun sends forth blue light only."
They are right and yet they are wrong: from their standpoint they are
capable of perceiving only a _fragment_ of truth. And so too with the
inhabitants of the red, yellow, and in-between regions. And they will
all scourge and slay one another to force _their_ belief in _their_
fragment upon the others--till, grown wiser through travelling in each
others' regions, they come to the harmonious agreement that the sun
sends out light of varying colours. That comprehends more truth, but it
is not yet _the_ Truth. Only when the giant lens shall have recombined
the split-up rays, and when the invisible, chemical and heat rays
have given proof of their own specific effects, will a view more in
accordance with the facts be able to arise, and men will perceive that
the sun emits white light which is split up by the prism into differing
rays with different peculiarities, which rays can be recombined by the
lens into one mass of white light.

This example shows sufficiently well that the road to Truth leads
through far-reaching and comparative observations, the results of which
must be controlled by the help of freely chosen _experiments_, until
well-grounded hypotheses and theories can be put forward; but these
hypotheses and theories will fall to the ground as soon as a single new
observation or experiment contradicts them.

The way is difficult, and in the end all man ever attains to is
_relative_ truth. But such relative truth suffices for the time being,
if it serves to explain the most important actual concatenations of the
past, to light up present problems, to predict those of the future,
so that we are then in a position to achieve adaptation through our
knowledge. But _absolute_ truth could be accessible only to omniscience,
aware of all possible concatenations and combinations; that is not
possible, for the concatenations and their combinations are infinite.
Accordingly, we shall never know more than an approximate truth. Should
new relationships be discovered, new combinations built up, then the
picture changes, and with it the entire possibilities in knowledge and
power. To what revolutions in daily life does not every new scientific
discovery lead: how absurdly little was the beginning of our first
ideas of electricity, how inconceivably great the results! Time and
again it is necessary to repeat this commonplace, because one sees
how life is always made bitter for the innovators in every scientific
field, and now is it being made especially so for the disciples of
the psychoanalytic school. Of course, every one admits the truth of
this platitude so long as it is a matter of "academic" discussion, but
only so long; just as soon as a concrete case has to be considered,
sympathies and antipathies rush into the foreground and darken judgment.
And therefore the scientist must fight tirelessly, appealing to logic
and honour, for freedom of research in every field, and must not
permit authority, of no matter what political or religious tinge, to
advance reasons of _opportunism_ to destroy or restrict this freedom;
opportunist reasons may be and are in place elsewhere, not here. Finally
we must completely disavow that maxim of the Middle Ages: "_Philosophia
ancilla Theologiæ_," and no less, too, the war-cries of the university
class-rooms with their partisanship of one or other religious or
political party. All fanaticism is the enemy of science, which must
above all things be _independent_.

And when we turn from the search for Truth back once more to
therapeutics, we see immediately that here too we are in agreement.
In practice expediency _must_ rule: the doctor from the yellow region
must adapt himself to the sick in the yellow region, as must the
doctor in the blue region, to his patients; both have the same object
in view. And the doctor who lives in the white light of the sun must
take into consideration the past experiences of his patients from the
yellow or blue region, in spite of, or perhaps rather because of, his
own wider knowledge. In such cases the way to healing will be long and
difficult, may indeed lead more easily into a _cul-de-sac_, than in
cases where he has to do with patients who, like himself, have already
come to a knowledge of the white sunlight, or, one might say, when his
patient-material has "already sorted itself out." With such sorted-out
material the psychoanalyst can employ psychoanalysis exclusively; and
may deem himself happy in that he need not "play the augur." Now, what
are these psychoanalytic methods? If I understand you aright, from
beginning to end it is a question of dealing directly and openly with
_the basic forces of the human soul_, so that the analysed person, be
he sick or sound or in some stage between--for health and sickness
flow over by imperceptible degrees into one another--shall gradually
have his eyes opened to the drama that is being acted within him. He
has to come to an understanding of the development of the hostile
automatisms of his personality, and by means of this understanding he
must gradually learn to free himself from them; he must learn, too, how
to employ and strengthen the favourable automatisms. He must learn
to make his self-knowledge real, and of practical use, to control his
soul's workings so that a balance may be established between the spheres
of emotion and reason. And what share in all this has the physician's
_suggestion_? I can scarcely believe that suggestion can be altogether
avoided till the patient feels himself really _free_. Such freedom, it
goes without saying, is the main thing to strive for, and it must be
_active_. The sick man who simply obeys a suggestion, obeys it only just
so long as the "transference to the doctor" remains potent.

But if he wishes to be able to adjust himself to all circumstances he
must have fortified himself "from within." He should no longer need the
crutches of faith, but be capable of encountering all theoretical and
practical problems squarely, and of solving them by himself. That is
surely your view? Or have I not understood correctly?

I next ask, must not every single case be treated differently, of course
_within the limits of the psychoanalytic method_? For if every case is a
case by itself, it must indeed demand individual treatment.

"Il n'y a pas de maladies, il n'y a que des malades," said a French
doctor whose name escapes me. But _on broad lines_, what course, from a
technical point of view, does analysis take, and what deviations occur
most frequently? That I would gladly learn from you. I take for granted
that all "augurs' tricks," darkened rooms, masquerading, chloroform, are
out of the question.

Psychoanalysis--purged so far as is humanly possible from suggestive
influence--appears to have an essential difference from Dubois'
psychotherapy. With Dubois, from the beginning conversation about the
past is forbidden, and "the moral reasons for recovery" placed in the
forefront; whilst psychoanalysis uses the subconscious material from
the patient's past as well as present, for present self-understanding.
Another difference lies in the conception of morality: morals are
above all "_relative_." But what essential forms shall they assume at
those moments when one can hardly avoid suggestion? You will say, the
occasion must decide. Agreed, as regards older people, or adults, who
have to live in an unenlightened _milieu_. But if one is dealing with
children, the seed of the future, is it not a sacred duty to enlighten
them as to the shaky foundations of the so-called "moral" conceptions
of the past, which have only a dogmatic basis; is it not a duty to
educate them into full freedom by courageously unveiling Truth? I ask
this not so much with regard to the analysing doctor as to the teacher.
May not the creation of _free schools_ be looked for as one task for the
psychoanalyst?


VI.

_From Dr. Jung._

    11th February, 1913.

The idea of the relativity of "Truth" has been current for ages, but
whether true or not, it does not stand in the way of anything save the
beliefs of dogma and authority.

You ask me, or indeed tell me--what psychoanalysis is. Before
considering your views, permit me first to try and mark out the
territory and definition of psychoanalysis. Psychoanalysis is primarily
just a method--but a method complying with all the rigorous demands
insisted upon to-day by the conception "method." Let it be made plain
at once that psychoanalysis is not an _anamnesis_, as those who know
everything without learning are pleased to believe. It is essentially
a method for the exploration of the unconscious associations, into
which no question of the conscious self enters. Again, it is not
a _kind_ of _examination_ of the nature of an intelligence test,
though this mistake is common in certain circles. It is no _cathartic
method_, abreacting real and phantastic "traumata," with or without
hypnosis. _Psychoanalysis is a method which makes possible the analytic
reduction of the psychic content to its simplest expression, and the
discovery of the line of least resistance in the development of a
harmonious personality._ In neurosis, straightforward direction of
life's energies is lacking, because opposing tendencies traverse and
hinder psychological adaptation. Psychoanalysis, so far as our present
knowledge of it goes, thus appears to be simply a rational nerve-therapy.

For the technical application of psychoanalysis no programme can be
formulated. There are only general principles, and, for the individual
case, working rules. (Here let me refer you to Freud's work in volume
I. of the _Internationale Zeitschrift für Ärztliche Psychoanalyse_.) My
one working rule is to conduct the analysis as a perfectly ordinary,
sensible conversation, and to avoid all appearance of medical magic.

The leading principle of the psychoanalytic technique is to analyse
the _psychic material which offers itself then and there_. Every
interference on the part of the analyst, with the object of inducing
the analysis to follow some systematic course, is a gross mistake in
technique. _So-called chance is the law and the order of psychoanalysis._

Naturally in the beginning of the analysis the anamnesis and the
diagnosis come first. The subsequent analytic process develops quite
differently in every case. To give rules is well-nigh impossible. All
one can say is that very frequently, quite at the beginning, a series
of resistances have to be overcome, resistances against both method and
man. Patients having no idea of psychoanalysis must first be given some
understanding of the method. In those who already know something of it
there are very often many misconceptions to set right, and frequently
one has to deal also with many reproaches cast by scientific criticism.
In either case the misconceptions rest upon arbitrary interpretations,
superficiality, or complete ignorance of the facts.

If the patient is himself a doctor his special knowledge may prove
extremely tiresome. To intelligent colleagues it is best to give a
complete theoretic exposition. With foolish and limited persons you
begin quietly with analysis. In the unconscious of such folk there
is a confederate that never refuses help. From the analysis of the
very earliest dreams the emptiness of the criticism is obvious; and
ultimately of the whole beautiful edifice of supposedly scientific
scepticism nothing remains, save a little heap of personal vanity. I
have had amusing experiences here.

It is best to let the patient talk freely and to confine oneself to
pointing out connexions here and there. When the conscious material is
exhausted we come to the dreams, which furnish us with the subliminal
material. If people have no dreams, as they allege, or if they forget
them, there is usually still some conscious material that ought to be
produced and discussed, but is kept back owing to resistances. When the
conscious is emptied then come the dreams, which are indeed, as you
know, the chief material of the analysis.

How the "Analysis" is to be made and what is to be said to patients
depends, firstly, upon the material to be dealt with; secondly, on the
doctor's skill; and, thirdly, on the patient's capacity. I must insist
that no one ought to undertake analysis except on the basis of a sound
knowledge of the subject; that necessitates an intimate understanding of
the existing literature. Without this, the work may be bungled.

I do not know what else to tell you beforehand. I must wait for further
questions. In regard to questions of morality and education let me say
that these belong to the later stages of the analysis, wherein they
find--or should find--solutions for themselves. _You cannot compile
recipes out of psychoanalysis._


VII

_From Dr. Loÿ._

    10th February, 1913.

You write that a solid knowledge of the psychoanalytic literature is
necessary for initiation into psychoanalysis. I should agree, but with a
certain reservation: the more one reads, the more one notices how many
contradictions there are among the different writers, and less and less
does one know--until one has had sufficient personal experience--to
which view to give adherence, since quite frequently assertions are made
without any proof. For example, I had thought (strengthened in the view
by my own experience of suggestion-therapy) that the transference to
the doctor might be an essential condition in the patient's cure. But
you write: "We psychoanalysts do not build upon the patient's faith,
rather do we have to deal with his criticism." And Stekel writes, on
the other hand (_Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, 3rd year, vol. IV.,
p. 176, "Ausgänge der psychoanalytischen Kuren"): "Love for the doctor
can become a power essential to recovery. Neurotics never get well for
love of themselves. They recover out of love for the doctor. They give
him that pleasure." Here again, surely, stress is laid on the power of
suggestion? And yet Stekel too thinks he is a psychoanalyst pure and
simple. On the other hand, you say in your letter of Jan. 20th that "the
doctor's personality is one of the main factors in the cure." Should
not this expression be translated: "When the doctor inspires respect in
the patient and is worthy of his love, the patient will gladly follow
his example and endeavour to recover from his neurosis and fulfil his
human duties in the widest sense"? I think one can only emerge from
all this uncertainty by means of much personal experience, which will
indicate also which way best suits one's own personality and brings the
greatest therapeutic success. This is a further reason for undergoing
analysis oneself, to recognise fully what one is. I was decidedly in
agreement with your definition of psychoanalysis in its first (negative)
portion: psychoanalysis is neither an _anamnesis_ nor a _method of
examination_ after the fashion of a test for intelligence, nor yet
a _psychocatharsis_. In your second (positive) part, however, your
definition: "Psychoanalysis is a method of discovering the line of least
resistance to the harmonious development of the whole personality,"
seems to me valid for the patient's inertia, but not for the releasing
of the sublimated libido with a view to the new direction of life. You
consider that the neurosis causes a lack of singleness of aim in life,
because opposing tendencies hinder psychic adaptation. True, but will
not this psychic adaptation eventuate quite differently according as
the patient, when well, directs his life either to the avoidance of
pain merely (line of least resistance) or to the achievement of the
greatest pleasure?--In the first case he would be more passive, he
would merely reconcile himself "to the emptiness of reality" (Stekel,
_loc. cit._, p. 187). In the second he would be "filled with enthusiasm"
for something or other or some person or other. But what will determine
this choice of his as to whether he will be passive rather than active
in his "second life"? In your view, will the determining factor manifest
itself spontaneously in the course of the analysis, and must the
doctor carefully avoid swaying the balance to one side or other by his
influence? Or must he, if he does _not_ renounce the right to canalise
the patient's libido in some particular direction, renounce the right
to be called a psychoanalyst, and is he to be regarded as "moderate"
or altogether as "wild"?[181] (Cf. Furtmüller, "Wandlungen in der
Freudschen Schule," _Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse_, vols. IV., V.,
3rd year, p. 191.) But I think you have already answered this question,
since in your last letter you write: "Every interference on the part of
the analyst is a gross mistake in technique. So-called chance is the law
and the order of psychoanalysis." But, torn from its context, perhaps
this does not quite give your whole meaning. With regard to detailed
explanation of the psychoanalytic method before the beginning of the
analysis, I think you agree with Freud and Stekel: give too little
rather than too much. For the knowledge _instilled into_ a patient
remains more or less half-knowledge, and half-knowledge engenders "the
desire to know better" (than the analyst), which only impedes progress.
So, after brief explanation, first "let the patient talk," then and
there point out connexions, then after the exhaustion of the conscious
material, take dreams.

But there another difficulty confronts me which I have already pointed
out in our talks: you find the patient adapting himself to the doctor's
tone, language, jargon, whether from conscious imitation, transference,
or even resistance, when he can fight the analyst with his own weapons;
how then can you possibly prevent his beginning to produce all manner of
phantasies as supposedly real traumata of early childhood, and _dreams_
supposedly spontaneous which are in reality, though not designedly,
directly or indirectly _suggested_? I then told you that Forel ("Der
Hypnotismus") made his patients dream just what he wanted, and I have
myself easily repeated the experiment. But if the analyst desires to
_suggest nothing_, should he remain silent for the most part and let the
patient speak--except that in interpreting dreams he may lay before the
patient his own interpretation?


VIII

_From Dr. Jung._

    18th February, 1913.

I cannot but agree with your observation that confusion reigns in
psychoanalytic literature. Just at this moment different points of view
are developing in the theoretical conception of the analytic results;
not to mention many individual deviations. Over against Freud's almost
purely _causal_ conception, there has developed, apparently in absolute
contradiction, Adler's purely _final_ view, but in reality the latter
is an essential complement of Freud's theory. I hold rather to a middle
course, taking into account both standpoints. That discord still reigns
round the ultimate questions of psychoanalysis need not surprise us
when we consider the difficulty. The problem of the therapeutic effect
of psychoanalysis is bound up in particular with supremely difficult
questions, so that it would indeed be astonishing if we had yet
reached final certitude. Stekel's statement to which you refer is very
characteristic. What he says about love for the doctor is obviously
true, but it is a simple affirmation, and not a goal or plumb-line of
the analytic therapy. If his statement were the goal, many cures, it is
true, would be possible, but also many calamities might result which are
avoidable. But the aim is so to educate the patient that he will get
well for his own sake and by reason of his own determination, rather
than to procure his doctor some sort of advantage; though of course
it would be absurd from the therapeutic standpoint not to allow the
patient to get better because in doing so he does the doctor a good turn
also. It suffices if the patient knows it. But we must not prescribe
for him which path he should take to recovery. Naturally it seems to me
(from the psychoanalytic standpoint) an inadmissible use of suggestive
influence if the patient is compelled to get better out of love for
the doctor. And indeed such compulsion may sometimes take bitter
revenge. The "you must and shall be saved" is no more to be commended in
nerve-therapy than in any other department of life. It contradicts the
principle of analytic treatment, which shuns all coercion and desires
to let everything grow up from within. I do not, as you know, object to
influencing by use of suggestion in general, but merely to a doubtful
motivation. If the doctor demands that his patient shall get well from
love of himself, the patient may easily reckon on reciprocal services
and will without doubt try to extort them. I can but utter a warning
against any such method. A far stronger motive for recovery--also a far
healthier and ethically more valuable one--consists in the patient's
thorough insight into the real state of affairs, the recognition of how
things are now and how they ought to be. The man of any sort of worth
will then discern that he can hardly sit down at ease in the quagmire of
his neurosis.

With your rendering of what I said about the healing power of
personality I cannot entirely agree. I wrote that the doctor's
personality has a power for healing because the patient reads the
doctor's personality: not that he produces a cure through _love_ of the
doctor. The doctor cannot prevent the patient's beginning to behave
himself towards _his_ conflicts just as the doctor himself behaves,
for nothing is finer than a neurotic's intuition. _But every strong
transference serves this same purpose._ If the doctor makes himself
charming, he buys off from the patient a series of resistances which he
should have overcome, and whose overcoming will certainly have to be
gone through later on. Nothing is won by this technique; at most the
beginning of the analysis is made easy for the patient (though this is
not quite without its use in certain cases). To be able to crawl through
a barbed wire fence without some enticing end in view testifies to an
ascetic strength of will which you can expect neither from the ordinary
person nor from the neurotic. Even the Christian religion, whose moral
demands certainly reached a great height, thought it no scorn to
represent the near approach of the Kingdom of Heaven as goal and reward
of earthly pain. In my view, the doctor may well speak of the rewards
which follow the toils of analysis. But he must not depict himself or
his friendship, in hints or promises, as reward, if he is not seriously
determined to keep his word.

In regard to your criticism of my outline-definition of the conception
of psychoanalysis, it must be observed that the road over the steep
mountain is the line of least resistance only when a ferocious bull
waits for you in the pleasant valley-road. In other words, the line
of least resistance is a compromise with _all_ demands, and not
with inertia alone. It is prejudice to think that the line of least
resistance coincides with the path of inertia. (That's what we thought
in the days when we dawdled over Latin exercises.) Inertia is only an
immediate advantage and leads to consequences which produce the worst
resistances; as a whole, it does not lie in the direction of least
resistance. Life along the line of least resistance is not synonymous
with a man's regardless pursuit of his own egoistic desires. He who
lives thus soon painfully perceives that he is not moving along the line
of least resistance, for he is also a social being, and not merely a
bundle of egoistic instincts, as some people rather like to depict him.
This is best seen among primitive men and herd-animals, who all have a
richly developed social sense. Without it, indeed, the herd could not
exist at all. Man as herd-animal has therefore by no manner of means to
subject himself to laws enforced on him from without; he carries his
social imperatives within himself, _a priori_, as an inborn necessity.
As you see, I here put myself in decided opposition to certain views--I
think quite unjustified--which have been put forth here and there
inside the psychoanalytic movement.

So the line of least resistance does not signify _eo ipso_ the avoidance
of unpleasure so much as the just balancing of unpleasure and pleasure.
Painful activity by itself leads to no result but exhaustion. Man must
be able to take pleasure in his life, or the struggle of life has no
reward. What direction the patient's future life should take is not ours
to judge. We must not imagine we know better than his own nature--or
we prove ourselves educators of the worst kind. Psychoanalysis is but
a means of removing stones from the path, and in no way a method (as
hypnotism often pretends to be) of putting anything into the patient
which was not there before. So we renounce any attempt to give a
direction, and occupy ourselves only with setting in proper relief
all that analysis brings into the light of day, in order that the
patient may see clearly, and be in a position to draw the appropriate
conclusions. Anything that he has not himself won, he does not in
the long run believe in; and all that he has received from authority
keeps him still infantile. He must rather be put in such a position as
will enable him to take control of his own life. It is the art of the
psychoanalyst to follow the patient's apparently mistaken paths without
prejudice, and thus to discover his strayed and separated sheep. Working
on a system, according to a preconceived scheme, we spoil the best
results of the analysis. So I hold fast to the maxim you quote from me:
"Every interference on the part of the analyst is a gross mistake in
technique. So-called chance is the law and the order of psychoanalysis."

You surely recognise that the schoolmaster-view never releases us
from the attempt to correct Nature and the desire to force upon her
our limited "truths." In nerve-therapy we get so many wonderful
experiences--unforeseen and impossible to foresee--that surely we ought
to dismiss all hope of being infallibly able to point out the right
path. The roundabout way and even the wrong way are necessary. If you
deny this you must also deny that the errors in the history of the
whole world have been necessary. That indeed were a world-conception fit
for a schoolmaster. For psychoanalysis this view suits not at all.

The question as to how much the analyst involuntarily suggests to
the patient is a very ticklish one. Undoubtedly that has a much more
important place than psychoanalysts have till now admitted. Experience
has convinced us that the patient rapidly avails himself of the ideas
won through the analysis, and of whatever comes to light through the
shaping of the dreams. You may obtain all manner of such impressions
from Stekel's book: "Die Sprache des Traumes" ("The Language of the
Dream"). I had once a most instructive experience: a very intelligent
lady had from the beginning extreme transference phantasies which
appeared in well-recognised erotic forms. Nevertheless she entirely
declined to admit their existence. Of course she was betrayed by the
dreams in which my own person was hidden behind some other figure, and
often difficult to unveil. A long series of such dreams forced me at
last to say: "So you see it is always like that, and the person of whom
one has really dreamt is replaced and hidden by some one else in the
manifest dream." Till then the patient had obstinately contested this
point. But this time she could no longer evade it, and had to admit my
rule--but only that she might play me a trick. Next day she brought me a
dream in which she and I appeared in a manifest lascivious situation. I
was naturally perplexed and thought of my rule. Her first association to
the dream was the malicious question: "It's always true, isn't it, that
the person of whom one is really dreaming is replaced by some one else
in the manifest dream-content?"

Clearly, she had made use of her experience to find a protective formula
by means of which she secured the open expression of her phantasies in
an apparently innocent way.

This example aptly shows how patients avail themselves of insight
gained during analysis; they use it symbolically. You get caught in
your own net if you give credence to the idea of unalterable, permanent
symbols. That has already happened to more than one psychoanalyst. It
is therefore fallacious to try to prove any particular theory from the
dreams arising in the course of analysis. For this purpose the only
conclusive dreams are those derived from demonstrably uninfluenced
persons. In such cases one would only have to exclude the possibility of
telepathic thought-reading. But if you concede this possibility you will
have to subject very many things to a rigorous re-examination and, among
others, many judicial verdicts.

But although we must do full justice to the force of suggestion, we must
not overrate it. The patient is no empty sack into which you may stuff
whatever you like; on the contrary, he brings his own predetermined
contents which strive obstinately against suggestion and always obtrude
themselves afresh. Through analytic "suggestions," only the outward
_form_ is determined, never the content--this is always being freshly
impressed upon my notice. The form is the unlimited, the ever-changing;
but the content is fixed, and only to be assailed slowly and with great
difficulty. Were it not so, suggestion-therapy would be in every respect
the most effective, profitable, and easiest therapy,--a real panacea.
That, alas! it is not, as every honourable hypnotist will freely admit.

To return to your question as to how far it is conceivable that patients
may deceive the doctor by making use--perhaps involuntarily--of his
expressions: this is indeed a very serious problem. The analyst must
exercise all possible care and practise unsparing self-criticism if
he would avoid, as far as possible, being led into error by patients'
dreams. It may be admitted that they almost always use modes of
expression in their dreams learnt in analysis--some more, some less.
Interpretations of earlier symbols will themselves be used again as
fresh symbols in later dreams. It happens not seldom, for instance, that
sexual situations which appear in symbolic form in the earlier dreams,
will appear "undisguised" in later ones, and here again they are the
symbolic expression of ideas of another character capable of further
analysis. The not infrequent dream of incestuous cohabitation is by
no means an "undisguised" content, but a dream as freshly symbolic and
capable of analysis as all others. You surely only reach the paradoxical
view that such a dream is "undisguised" if you are pledged to the sexual
theory of neurosis.

That the patient may mislead the doctor for a longer or shorter time by
means of deliberate deception and misrepresentation is possible; just as
occasionally happens in all other departments of medicine. Therewith the
patient injures himself most, since he has to pay for every deception
or suppression, with aggravated or additional symptoms. Deceptions are
so obviously disadvantageous to himself that in the end he can scarcely
avoid the definite relinquishment of such a course.

The technique of analysis we can best postpone for oral discussion.


IX

_From Dr. Loÿ._

    23rd February, 1913.

From your letter of 16th February I want first to single out the
end, where you so admirably assign to its proper place the power of
suggestion in psychoanalysis: "The patient is no empty sack, into which
you can cram what you will; he brings his own predetermined content
with him, with which one has always to reckon afresh." With this I
fully agree, my own experience confirms it. And you add: "This content
remains untouched by involuntary analytical suggestion, but its form is
altered, proteus-fashion, beyond measure." So it becomes a matter of
a sort of "mimicry" by which the patient seeks to escape the analyst,
who is driving him into a corner and therefore for the moment seems
to him an enemy. Until at last, through the joint work of patient and
analyst--the former spontaneously yielding up his psychic content,
the latter only interpreting and explaining--the analysis succeeds in
bringing so much light into the darkness of the patient's psyche that
he can see the true relationships and, without any preconceived plan of
the analyst's, can himself draw the right conclusions and apply them
to his future life. This new life will betake itself along the line of
least resistance--or should we not rather say, the least resistances,
as a "compromise with all the necessities," in a just balancing of
pleasure and unpleasure? It is not we who must arbitrarily seek to
determine how matters stand for the patient and what will benefit him;
his own nature decides. In other words, we must assume the _rôle_ of
the accoucheur who can bring out into the light of day a child already
alive, but who must avoid a series of mistakes if the child is to remain
able to live and the mother is not to be injured. All this is very
clear to me, since it is only the application to the psychoanalytic
method of a general principle which should have universal validity:
never do violence to Nature. Hence I also see that the psychoanalyst
must follow his patient's apparently "wrong roads" if the patient is
ever to arrive at his own convictions and be freed once and for all
from infantile reliance on authority. We ourselves as individuals have
learnt or can only learn by making mistakes how to avoid them for the
future, and mankind as a whole has created the conditions of its present
and future stages of development quite as much by frequent travel along
wrong paths as along the right road. Have not many neurotics--I do not
know if you will agree, but I think so--become ill partly for the very
reason that their infantile faith in authority has fallen to pieces?
Now they stand before the wreckage of their faith, weeping over it, in
dire distress because they cannot find a substitute which shall show
them clearly whither their life's course should now turn. So they remain
stuck fast betwixt infancy which they must unwillingly renounce, and the
serious duties of the present and future (the moral conflict). I see,
particularly in such cases, you are right in saying it is a mistake to
seek to replace the lost faith in authority by another similar faith,
certain to be useful only so long as the belief lasts. This applies to
the deliberate use of suggestion in psychoanalysis, and the building
upon the transference to the doctor as the object of the analytic
therapy. I am no longer in doubt about your maxim: "Every interference
on the analyst's part is a gross mistake in technique. So-called chance
is the law and the order of psychoanalysis." Further, I am entirely
in agreement with you when you say that _altruism necessarily must be
innate in man considered as a herd-animal_. The contrary would be the
thing to be wondered at.

I should be much disposed to agree that not the egoistic, but the
altruistic instincts are primary. Love and trust of the child for the
mother who feeds it, nurses, cherishes and pets it,--love of the man for
his wife, regarded as the going out towards another's personality,--love
for offspring, care for it,--love for kinsfolk, etc. The egoistic
instincts owe their origin to the desire for exclusive possession of
all that surrounds love, the desire to possess the mother exclusively,
in opposition to the father and the brothers and sisters, the desire
to have a woman for himself alone, the desire to possess exclusively
ornaments, clothing, etc. But perhaps you will say I am paradoxical
and that the instincts, egoistic or altruistic, arise together in the
heart of man, and that every instinct is ambivalent in nature. But I
have to ask if the feelings and instincts are really ambivalent? Are
they exactly bipolar? Are the qualities of all emotions altogether
comparable? Is love really the opposite of hate?

However that may be, in any case it is well that man bears the social
law within himself, as an inborn imperative; otherwise our civilised
humanity would fare badly, having to subject themselves to laws imposed
on them from outside only: they would be impervious to the inheritance
of the earlier religious faiths, and would soon fall into complete
anarchy. Man would then have to ask himself whether it would not be
better to maintain by force an extreme belief in religious authority
such as prevailed in the Middle Ages. For the benefits of civilisation,
which strove to grant every individual as much outward freedom as was
consistent with the freedom of others, would be well worth the sacrifice
of free research. But the age of this use of force against nature is
past, civilised man has left this wrong track behind, not arbitrarily,
but obeying an inner necessity, and we may look joyfully towards the
future. Mankind, advancing in knowledge, will find its way across the
ruins of faith in authority to the moral autonomy of the individual.


X

_From Dr. Jung._

    March, 1913.

At various places in your letters it has struck me that the problem
of "transference" seems to you particularly critical. Your feeling is
entirely justified. The transference is indeed at present the central
problem of analysis.

You know that Freud regards the transference as the projection of
infantile phantasies upon the doctor. To this extent the transference
is an infantile-erotic relationship. All the same, viewed from the
outside, superficially, the thing by no means always looks like an
infantile-erotic situation. As long as it is a question of the so-called
"positive" transference, the infantile-erotic character can usually be
recognised without difficulty. But if it is a "negative" transference,
you can see nothing but violent resistances which sometimes veil
themselves in seemingly critical or sceptical dress. In a certain
sense the determining factor in such circumstances is the patient's
relation to authority, that is, in the last resort, to the father. In
both forms of transference the doctor is treated as if he were the
father--according to the situation either tenderly or with hostility.
In this view the transference has the force of a resistance as soon as
it becomes a question of resolving the infantile attitude. But this
form of transference must be destroyed, inasmuch as the object of
analysis is the patient's moral autonomy. A lofty aim, you will say.
Indeed lofty, and far off, but still not altogether so remote, since it
actually corresponds to one of the predominating tendencies of our stage
of civilisation, namely, that urge towards individualisation by which
our whole epoch deserves to be characterised. (Cf. Müller-Lyer: "Die
Familie.") If a man does not believe in this orientation and still bows
before the scientific causal view-point, he will, of course, be disposed
merely to resolve this hostility, and to let the patient remain in a
positive relationship towards the father, _thus expressing the ideal of
an earlier epoch of civilisation_. It is commonly recognised that the
Catholic Church represents one of the most powerful organisations based
upon this earlier tendency. I cannot venture to doubt that there are
very many individuals who feel happier under compulsion from others than
when forced to discipline themselves. (Cf. Shaw: "Man and Superman.")
None the less, we do our neurotic patients a grievous wrong if we try
to force them all into the category of the unfree. Among neurotics,
there are not a few who do not require any reminders of their social
duties and obligations; rather are they born or destined to become the
bearers of new social ideals. They are neurotic so long as they bow down
to authority and refuse the freedom to which they are destined. Whilst
we look at life only retrospectively, as is the case in the Viennese
psychoanalytic writings, we shall never do justice to this type of case
and never bring the longed-for deliverance. For in that fashion we can
only educate them to become obedient children, and thereby strengthen
the very forces that have made them ill--their conservative retardation
and their submissiveness to authority. Up to a certain point this
is the right way to take with the infantile resistance which cannot
_yet_ reconcile itself with authority. But the power which edged them
out from their retrograde dependence on the father is not at all a
childish desire for insubordination, but the powerful urge towards the
development of an individual personality, and this struggle is their
imperative life's task. Adler's psychology does much greater justice to
this situation than Freud's.

In the one case (that of infantile intractability) the positive
transference signifies a highly important achievement, heralding cure;
in the other (infantile submissiveness) it portends a dangerous
backsliding, a convenient evasion of life's duty. The negative
transference represents in the first case an increased resistance, thus
a backsliding and an evasion of duty, but in the second it is an advance
of healing significance. (For the two types, cf. Adler's "Trotz und
Gehorsam.")

The transference then is, as you see, to be judged quite differently in
different cases.

The psychological process of "transference"--be it negative or
positive--consists in the libido _entrenching itself_, as it were, round
the personality of the doctor, the doctor accordingly representing
certain emotional values. (As you know, by _libido_ I understand very
much what Antiquity meant by the cosmogenic principle of _Eros_; in
modern terminology simply "psychic energy.") The patient is bound to
the doctor, be it in affection, be it in opposition, and cannot fail to
follow and imitate the doctor's psychic adaptations. To this he finds
himself urgently compelled. And with the best will in the world and all
technical skill, the doctor cannot prevent him, for intuition works
surely and instinctively, in despite of the conscious judgment, be it
never so strong. Were the doctor himself neurotic, and inadequate in
response to the demands of the external life, or inharmonious within,
the patient would copy the defect and build it up into the fabric of his
own presentations: you may imagine the result.

Accordingly I cannot regard the transference as merely the transference
of infantile-erotic phantasies; no doubt that is what it is from one
standpoint, but I see also in it, as I said in an earlier letter,
the process of the _growth of feeling_ and _adaptation_. From this
standpoint the infantile erotic phantasies, in spite of their
indisputable reality, appear rather as material for comparison or
as analogous pictures of something not understood as yet, than as
independent desires. This seems to me the real reason of their being
unconscious. The patient, not knowing the right attitude, tries to
grasp at a right relationship to the doctor by way of comparison and
analogy with his infantile experiences. It is not surprising that he
gropes back for just the most intimate relations of his childhood, to
discover the appropriate formula for his attitude to the doctor, for
this relationship also is very intimate, and to some extent different
from the sexual relationship, just as is that of the child towards its
parents. This relationship--child to parent--which Christianity has
everywhere set up as the symbolic formula for human relationships,
provides a way of restoring to the patient that directness of ordinary
human emotion of which he had been deprived through the inroad of
sexual and social values (from the standpoint of power, etc.). The
purely sexual, more or less primitive and barbaric valuation, operates
in far-reaching ways against a direct, simple human relationship, and
thereupon a blocking of the libido occurs which easily gives rise to
neurotic formations. By means of analysis of the infantile portion
of the transference-phantasies, the patient is brought back to the
remembrance of his childhood's relationship, and this--stripped of
its infantile qualities--gives him a beautiful, clear picture of
direct human intercourse as opposed to the purely sexual valuation. I
cannot regard it as other than a misconception to judge the childish
relationship retrospectively and therefore as exclusively a sexual one,
even though a certain sexual content can in no wise be denied to it.

Recapitulating, let me say this much of the positive transference:--

The patient's libido fastens upon the person of the doctor, taking the
shape of expectation, hope, interest, trust, friendship and love. Then
the transference produces the projection upon the doctor of infantile
phantasies, often of predominatingly erotic tinge. At this stage the
transference is usually of a decidedly sexual character, in spite of
the sexual component remaining relatively unconscious. But this phase
of feeling serves the higher aspect of the growth of human feeling as a
bridge, whereby the patient becomes conscious of the defectiveness of
his own adaptation, through his recognition of the doctor's attitude,
which is accepted as one suitable to life's demands, and normal in its
human relationships. By help of the analysis, and the recalling of his
childish relationships, the road is seen which leads right out of those
exclusively sexual or "power" evaluations of social surroundings which
were acquired in puberty and strongly reinforced by social prejudices.
This road leads on towards a purely human relation and intimacy, not
derived solely from the existence of a sexual or power-relation, but
depending much more upon a regard for personality. That is the road to
freedom which the doctor must show his patient.

Here indeed I must not omit to say that the obstinate clinging to the
sexual valuation would not be maintained so tenaciously if it had
not also a very deep significance for that period of life in which
propagation is of primary importance. The discovery of the value of
human personality belongs to a riper age. For young people the search
for the valuable personality is very often merely a cloak for the
evasion of their biological duty. On the other hand, an older person's
exaggerated looking back towards the sexual valuation of youth, is an
undiscerning and often cowardly and convenient retreat from a duty which
demands the recognition of personal values and his own enrolment among
the ranks of the priesthood of a newer civilisation. The young neurotic
shrinks back in terror from the extension of his tasks in life, the old
from the dwindling and shrinking of the treasures he has attained.

This conception of the transference is, you will have noted, most
intimately connected with the acceptance of the idea of biological
"_duties_." By this term you must understand those tendencies or
motives in human beings giving rise to civilisation, as inevitably
as in the bird they give rise to the exquisitely woven nest, and in
the stag to the production of antlers. The purely causal, not to say
materialistic conception of the immediately preceding decades, would
conceive the organic formation as the reaction of living matter, and
this doubtless provides a position heuristically useful, but, as far
as any real understanding goes, leads only to a more or less ingenious
and _apparent_ reduction and postponement of the problem. Let me refer
you to Bergson's excellent criticism of this conception. From external
forces but half the result, at most, could ensue; the other half lies
within the individual disposition of the living material, without which
it is obvious the specific reaction-formation could never be achieved.
This principle must be applied also in psychology. The psyche does not
only _react_; it also gives its own individual reply to the influences
at work upon it, and at least half the resulting configuration and its
existing disposition is due to this. Civilisation is never, and again
never, to be regarded as merely reaction to environment. That shallow
explanation we may abandon peacefully to the past century. It is just
these very dispositions which we must regard as imperative in the
psychological sphere; it is easy to get convincing proof daily of their
compulsive power. What I call "biological duty" is identical with these
dispositions.

In conclusion, I must deal with a matter which seems to have caused you
uneasiness, namely, the _moral_ question. Among our patients we see
many so-called immoral tendencies, therefore the thought involuntarily
forces itself upon the psychotherapist as to how things would go if all
these desires were to be gratified. You will have discerned already
from my earlier letters that these desires must not be estimated too
literally. As a rule it is rather a matter of unmeasured and exaggerated
demands, arising out of the patient's stored-up libido, which have
usurped a prominent position, usually quite against his own wish. In
most cases the canalisation of the libido for the fulfilment of life's
simple duties, suffices to reduce these exaggerated desires to zero.
But in some cases it must be recognised that such "immoral" tendencies
are in no way removed by analysis; on the contrary, they appear more
often and more clearly, hence it becomes plain that they belong to the
individual's biological duties. And this is particularly true of certain
sexual claims, whose aim is an individual valuation of sexuality. This
is not a question for pathology, it is a social question of to-day which
peremptorily demands an ethical solution. For many it is a biological
duty to work for the solution of this question, to discover some sort
of practical solution. (Nature, it is well known, does not content
herself with theories.) To-day we have no real sexual morality, only a
legal attitude towards sexuality; just as the early Middle Ages had no
genuine morality for financial transactions, but only prejudices and a
legal standpoint. We are not yet sufficiently advanced in the domain
of free sexual activity to distinguish between a moral and an immoral
relationship. We have a clear expression of this in the customary
treatment, or rather ill-treatment, of unmarried motherhood. For a great
deal of sickening hypocrisy, for the high tide of prostitution, and for
the prevalence of sexual diseases, we may thank both our barbarous,
undifferentiated legal judgments about the sexual situation, and our
inability to develop a finer moral perception of the immense psychologic
differences that may exist in free sexual activity.

This reference to the existence of an exceedingly complicated and
significant problem may suffice to explain why we by no means seldom
meet with individuals among our patients who are quite specially called,
because of their spiritual and social gifts, to take an active part in
the work of civilisation--for this they are biologically destined. We
must never forget that what to-day is deemed a moral law will to-morrow
be cast into the melting-pot and transformed, so that in the near or
distant future it may serve as the basis of a new ethical structure.
This much we ought to have learnt from the history of civilisation, that
the forms of morality belong to the category of transitory things. The
finest psychological tact is required with these critical natures, so
that the dangerous corners of infantile irresponsibility, indolence and
uncontrolledness may be turned, and a pure, untroubled vision of the
possibility of a moral autonomous activity made possible. Five per cent.
on money lent is fair interest, twenty per cent. is despicable usury.
That point of view we have to apply equally to the sexual situation.

So it comes about that there are many neurotics whose innermost delicacy
of feeling prevents their being at one with present-day morality, and
they cannot adapt themselves to civilisation as long as their moral
code has gaps in it, the filling up of which is a crying need of the
age. We deceive ourselves greatly if we suppose that many married women
are neurotic only because they are unsatisfied sexually or because they
have not found the right man, or because they still have a fixation to
their infantile sexuality. The real ground of the neurosis is, in many
cases, the inability to recognise the work that is waiting for them, of
helping to build up a new civilisation. We are all far too much at the
standpoint of the "nothing-but" psychology; we persist in thinking we
can squeeze the new future which is pressing in at the door into the
framework of the old and the known. And thus the view is only of the
present, never of the future. But it was of most profound psychological
significance when Christianity first discovered, in the orientation
towards the future, a redeeming principle for mankind. In the past
nothing can be altered, and in the present little, but the future is
ours and capable of raising life's intensity to its highest pitch. A
little space of youth belongs to us, all the rest of life belongs to our
children.

Thus does your question as to the significance of the loss of faith in
authority answer itself. The neurotic is ill not because he has lost his
old faith, but because he has not yet found a new form for his finest
aspirations.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 176: Translated by Mrs. Edith Eder.]

[Footnote 177: "Psychoanalysis." Nervous and Mental Disease, No. 19.
Monograph series.]

[Footnote 178: See Author's preface to "The Psychology of Dementia
Præcox."]

[Footnote 179: Thus a patient, who had been treated by a young colleague
without very much result, once said to me: "Certainly I made great
progress with him, and I am much better than I was. He tried to analyse
my dreams. It's true he never understood them, but he took _so much
trouble_ over them. He is really a good doctor."]

[Footnote 180: Defined in the Freudian sense, as the transference to the
doctor of infantile and sexual phantasies. A more advanced conception
of the transference perceives in it the important process of emotional
approach [_Einfühlung_] which at first makes use of infantile and sexual
analogies.]

[Footnote 181: "Selected Papers on Hysteria and other Psychoneuroses."
_Monograph Series_, No. 4, last edition.]




CHAPTER X

ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS IN PSYCHOPATHOLOGY[182]


When we speak of a thing as being "unconscious" we must not forget that
from the point of view of the functioning of the brain a thing may be
unconscious to us in two ways--physiologically or psychologically. I
shall only deal with the subject from the latter point of view. So that
for our purposes we may define the unconscious as "the sum of all those
psychological events which are not apperceived, and so are unconscious."

The unconscious contains all those psychic events which, because of the
lack of the necessary intensity of their functioning, are unable to pass
the threshold which divides the conscious from the unconscious; so that
they remain in effect below the surface of the conscious, and flit by in
subliminal phantom forms.

It has been known to psychologists since the time of Leibniz that the
elements--that is to say, the ideas and feelings which go to make up
the conscious mind, the so-called conscious content--are of a complex
nature, and rest upon far simpler and altogether unconscious elements;
it is the combination of these which gives the element of consciousness.
Leibniz has already mentioned the _perceptions insensibles_--those vague
perceptions which Kant called "shadowy" representations, which could
only attain to consciousness in an indirect manner. Later philosophers
assigned the first place to the unconscious, as the foundation upon
which the conscious was built.

But this is not the place to consider the many speculative theories nor
the endless philosophical discussions concerning the nature and quality
of the unconscious. We must be satisfied with the definition already
given, which will prove quite sufficient for our purpose, namely the
conception of the unconscious as the sum of all psychical processes
below the threshold of consciousness.

The question of the importance of the unconscious for psychopathology
may be briefly put as follows: "In what manner may we expect to find
unconscious psychic material behave in cases of psychosis and neurosis?"

In order to get a better grasp of the situation in connexion with
mental disorders, we may profitably consider first how unconscious
psychic material behaves in the case of normal people, especially
trying to visualize what in normal men is apt to be unconscious. As
a preliminary to this knowledge we must get a complete understanding
of what is contained in the conscious mind; and then, by a process of
elimination we may expect to find what is contained in the unconscious,
for obviously--_per exclusionem_--what is in the conscious cannot be
unconscious. For this purpose we examine all activities, interests,
passions, cares, and joys, which are conscious to the individual. All
that we are thus able to discover becomes, _ipso facto_, of no further
moment as a content of the unconscious, and we may then expect to find
only those things contained in the unconscious which we have not found
in the conscious mind.

Let us take a concrete example: A merchant, who is happily married,
father of two children, thorough and painstaking in his business
affairs, and at the same time trying in a reasonable degree to improve
his position in the world, carries himself with self-respect, is
enlightened in religious matters, and even belongs to a society for the
discussion of liberal ideas.

What can we reasonably consider to be the content of the unconscious in
the case of such an individual?

Considered from the above theoretical standpoint, everything in the
personality that is not contained in the conscious mind should be
found in the unconscious. Let us agree, then, that this man consciously
considers himself to possess all the fine attributes we have just
described--no more, no less. Then it must obviously result that he is
entirely unaware that a man may be not merely industrious, thorough,
and painstaking, but that he may also be careless, indifferent,
untrustworthy; for some of these last attributes are the common heritage
of mankind and may be found to be an essential component of every
character. This worthy merchant forgets that quite recently he allowed
several letters to remain unanswered which he could easily have answered
at once. He forgets, too, that he failed to bring a book home which his
wife has asked him to get at the book-stall, where she had previously
ordered it, although he might easily have made a note of her wish.
But such occurrences are common with him. Therefore we are obliged to
conclude that he is also lazy and untrustworthy. He is convinced that he
is a thoroughly loyal subject; but for all that he failed to declare the
whole of his income to the assessor, and when they raise his taxes, he
votes for the Socialists.

He believes himself to be an independent thinker, yet a little while
back he undertook a big deal on the Stock Exchange, and when he came
to enter the details of the transaction in his books he noticed with
considerable misgivings that it fell upon a Friday, the 13th of the
month. Therefore, he is also superstitious and not free in his thinking.

So here we are not at all surprised to find these compensating vices
to be an essential content of the unconscious. Obviously, therefore,
the reverse is true--namely, that unconscious virtues compensate for
conscious deficiencies. The law which ought to follow as the result
of such deductions would appear to be quite simple--to wit, the
conscious spendthrift is unconsciously a miser; the philanthropist is
unconsciously an egoist and misanthrope. But, unfortunately, it is
not quite so easy as that, although there is a basis of truth in this
simple rule. For there are essential hereditary dispositions of a latent
or manifest nature which upset the simple rule of compensation, and
which vary greatly in individual cases. From entirely different motives
a man may, for instance, be a philanthropist, but the manner of his
philanthropy depends upon his originally inherited disposition, and the
way in which the philanthropic attitude is compensated depends upon his
motives. It is not sufficient simply to know that a certain person is
philanthropic in order to diagnose an unconscious egoism. For we must
also bring to such a diagnosis a careful study of the motives involved.

In the case of normal people the principal function of the unconscious
is to effect a compensation and thus produce a balance. All extreme
conscious tendencies are softened and toned down through an effective
opposite impulse in the unconscious. This compensating agency, as I have
tried to show in the case of the merchant, maintains itself through
certain unconscious, inconsequent activities, as it were, which Freud
has very well described as symptomatic acts (_Symptom-handlungen_).

To Freud we owe thanks also for having called attention to the
importance of dreams, for by means of them, also, we are able to learn
much about this compensating function. There is a fine historical
example of this in the well-known dream of Nebuchadnezzar in the fourth
chapter of the Book of Daniel, where Nebuchadnezzar at the height of
his power had a dream which foretold his downfall. He dreamed of a tree
which had raised its head even up to heaven and now must be hewn down.
This is a dream which is obviously a counterpoise to the exaggerated
feeling of royal power.

Now considering states in which the mental balance is disturbed, we can
easily see, from what has preceded, wherein lies the importance of the
unconscious for psychopathology. Let us ponder the question of where
and in what manner the unconscious manifests itself in abnormal mental
conditions. The way in which the unconscious works is most clearly seen
in disturbances of a psychogenic nature, such as hysteria, compulsion
neurosis, etc.

We have known for a long time that certain symptoms of these
disturbances are produced by unconscious psychic events. Just as
clear, but less recognised, are the manifestations of the unconscious
in actually insane patients. As the intuitive ideas of normal men do
not spring from logical combinations of the conscious mind, so the
hallucinations and delusions of the insane arise, not out of conscious
but out of unconscious processes.

Formerly, when we held a more materialistic view of psychiatry we were
inclined to believe that all delusions, hallucinations, stereotypic
acts, etc., were provoked by morbid processes in the brain cells. Such a
theory, however, ignores that delusions, hallucinations, etc., are also
to be met with in certain functional disturbances, and not only in the
case of functional disturbances, but also in the case of normal people.
Primitive people may have visions and hear strange voices without having
their mental processes at all disturbed. To seek to ascribe symptoms
of that nature directly to a disease of the brain cells I hold to be
superficial and unwarranted. Hallucinations show very plainly how a part
of the unconscious content can force itself across the threshold of the
conscious. The same is true of a delusion whose appearance is at once
strange and unexpected by the patient.

The expression "mental balance" is no mere figure of speech, for its
disturbance is a real disturbance of that equilibrium which actually
exists between the unconscious and conscious content to a greater extent
than has heretofore been recognised or understood. As a matter of fact,
it amounts to this--that the normal functioning of the unconscious
processes breaks through into the conscious mind in an abnormal manner,
and thereby disturbs the adaptation of the individual to his environment.

If we study attentively the history of any such person coming under
our observation, we shall often find that he has been living for a
considerable time in a sort of peculiar individual isolation, more or
less shut off from the world of reality. This constrained condition
of aloofness may be traced back to certain innate or early acquired
peculiarities, which show themselves in the events of his life. For
instance, in the histories of those suffering from dementia præcox
we often hear such a remark as this: "He was always of a pensive
disposition, and much shut up in himself. After his mother died he
cut himself off still more from the world, shunning his friends and
acquaintances." Or again, we may hear, "Even as a child he devised many
peculiar inventions; and later, when he became an engineer, he occupied
himself with most ambitious schemes."

Without discussing the matter further it must be plain that a
counterpoise is produced in the unconscious as a compensation to the
one-sidedness of the conscious attitude. In the first case we may expect
to find an increasing pressing forward in the unconscious, of a wish
for human intercourse, a longing for mother, friends, relatives; while
in the second case self-criticism will try to establish a correcting
balance. Among normal people a condition never arises so one-sided
that the natural corrective tendencies of the unconscious entirely
lose their value in the affairs of everyday life; but in the case of
abnormal people, it is eminently characteristic that the individual
entirely fails to recognise the compensating influences which arise in
the unconscious. He even continues to accentuate his one-sidedness; this
is in accord with the well-known psychological fact that the worst enemy
of the wolf is the wolf-hound, the greatest despiser of the negro is the
mulatto, and that the biggest fanatic is the convert; for I should be a
fanatic were I to attack a thing outwardly which inwardly I am obliged
to concede as right.

The mentally unbalanced man tries to defend himself against his own
unconscious, that is to say, he battles against his own compensating
influences. The man already dwelling in a sort of atmosphere of
isolation, continues to remove himself further and further from the
world of reality, and the ambitious engineer strives by increasingly
morbid exaggerations of invention to disprove the correctness of his own
compensating powers of self-criticism. As a result of this a condition
of excitation is produced, from which results a great lack of harmony
between the conscious and unconscious attitudes. The pairs of opposites
are torn asunder, the resulting division or strife leads to disaster,
for the unconscious soon begins to intrude itself violently upon the
conscious processes. Then odd and peculiar thoughts and moods supervene,
and not infrequently incipient forms of hallucination, which clearly
bear the stamp of the internal conflict.

These corrective impulses or compensations which now break through into
the conscious mind, should theoretically be the beginning of the healing
process, because through them the previously isolated attitude should
apparently be relieved. But in reality this does not result, for the
reason that the unconscious corrective impulses which thus succeed in
making themselves apparent to the conscious mind, do so in a form that
is altogether unacceptable to consciousness.

The isolated individual begins to hear strange voices, which accuse him
of murder and all sorts of crimes. These voices drive him to desperation
and in the resulting agitation he attempts to get into contact with the
surrounding _milieu_, and does what he formerly had anxiously avoided.
The compensation, to be sure, is reached, but to the detriment of the
individual.

The pathological inventor, who is unable to profit by his previous
failures, by refusing to recognise the value of his own self-criticism,
becomes the creator of still more preposterous designs. He wishes to
accomplish the impossible but falls into the absurd. After a while he
notices that people talk about him, make unfavourable remarks about him,
and even scoff at him. He believes a far-reaching conspiracy exists
to frustrate his discoveries and render them objects of ridicule. By
this means his unconscious brings about the same results that his
self-criticism could have attained, but again only to the detriment of
the individual, because the criticism is projected into his surroundings.

An especially typical form of unconscious compensation--to give a
further example--is the paranoia of the alcoholic. The alcoholic loses
his love for his wife; the unconscious compensation tries to lead him
back again to his duty, but only partially succeeds, for it causes him
to become jealous of his wife as if he still loved her. As we know, he
may even go so far as to kill both his wife and himself, merely out of
jealousy. In other words, his love for his wife has not been entirely
lost, it has simply become subliminal; but from the realm of the
unconscious it can now only reappear in the form of jealousy.

We see something of a similar nature in the case of religious converts.
One who turns from protestantism to catholicism has, as is well known,
the tendency to be somewhat fanatical. His protestantism is not entirely
relinquished, but has merely disappeared into the unconscious, where it
is constantly at work as a counter-argument against the newly acquired
catholicism. Therefore the new convert feels himself constrained to
defend the faith he has adopted in a more or less fanatical way. It
is exactly the same in the case of the paranoiac, who feels himself
constantly constrained to defend himself against all external criticism,
because his delusional system is too much threatened from within.

The strange manner in which these compensating influences break through
into the conscious mind derives its peculiarities from the fact that
they have to struggle against the resistances already existing in the
conscious mind, and therefore present themselves to the patient's mind
in a thoroughly distorted manner. And secondly, these compensating
equivalents are obliged necessarily to present themselves in the
language of the unconscious--that is, in material of a heterogeneous
and subliminal nature. For all the material of the conscious mind which
is of no further value, and can find no suitable employment, becomes
subliminal, such as all those forgotten infantile and phantastic
creations that have ever entered the heads of men, of which only the
legends and myths still remain. For certain reasons which I cannot
discuss further here, this latter material is frequently found in
dementia præcox.

I hope I may have been able to give in this brief contribution, which
I feel to be unfortunately incomplete, a glimpse of the situation
as it presents itself to me of the importance of the unconscious in
psychopathology. It would be impossible in a short discourse to give an
adequate idea of all the work that has already been done in this field.

To sum up, I may say that the function of the unconscious in conditions
of mental disturbance is essentially a compensation of the content
of the conscious mind. But because of the characteristic condition
of one-sidedness of the conscious striving in all such cases, the
compensating correctives are rendered useless. It is, however,
inevitable that these unconscious tendencies break through into the
conscious mind, but in adapting themselves to the character of the
one-sided conscious aims, it is only possible for them to appear in a
distorted and unacceptable form.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 182: Paper given before the Section of Neurology and
Psychological Medicine, Aberdeen, 1914. Reprinted from the _British
Medical Journal_, by kind permission of the Editor, Dr. Dawson Williams.]




CHAPTER XI

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES[183]


It is well known that in their general physiognomy hysteria and dementia
præcox present a striking contrast, which is seen particularly in the
attitude of the sufferers towards the external world. The reactions
provoked in the hysteric surpass the normal level of intensity of
feeling, whilst this level is not reached at all by the precocious
dement. The picture presented by these contrasted illnesses is one of
exaggerated emotivity in the one, and extreme apathy in the other, with
regard to the environment. In their personal relations this difference
is very marked. Abstraction creates some exceptions here, for we remain
in affective rapport with our hysterical patients, which is not the case
in dementia præcox.

The opposition between these two nosological types is also seen in
the rest of their symptomatology. From the intellectual point of view
the products of hysterical imagination may be accounted for in a very
natural and human way in each individual case by the antecedents
and individual history of the patient; while the inventions of the
precocious dement, on the contrary, are more nearly related to dreams
than to normal consciousness, and they display moreover an incontestably
archaic tendency, wherein mythological creations of primitive
imagination are more in evidence than the personal memories of the
patient. From the physical point of view we do not find in dementia
præcox those symptoms so common in the hysteric, which simulate well
known or severe organic affections.

All this clearly indicates that hysteria is characterised by a
centrifugal tendency of the libido,[184] whilst in dementia præcox its
tendency is centripetal. The reverse occurs, however, where the illness
has fully established its compensatory effects. In the hysteric the
libido is always hampered in its movements of expansion and forced to
regress upon itself; one observes that such individuals cease to partake
in the common life, are wrapped up in their phantasies, keep their beds,
or are unable to live outside their sick-rooms, etc. The precocious
dement, on the contrary, during the incubation of his illness turns
away from the outer world in order to withdraw into himself; but when
the period of morbid compensation arrives, he seems constrained to draw
attention to himself, and to force himself upon the notice of those
around him, by his extravagant, insupportable, or directly aggressive
conduct.

I propose to use the terms "extroversion" and "introversion" to describe
these two opposite directions of the libido, further qualifying them,
however, as "regressive" in morbid cases where phantasies, fictions,
or phantastic interpretations, inspired by emotivity, falsify the
perceptions of the subject about things, or about himself. We say that
he is extroverted when he gives his fundamental interest to the outer or
objective world, and attributes an all-important and essential value to
it: he is introverted, on the contrary, when the objective world suffers
a sort of depreciation, or want of consideration, for the sake of the
exaltation of the individual himself, who then monopolising all the
interest, grows to believe no one but himself worthy of consideration.
I will call "regressive extroversion" the phenomenon which Freud calls
"transference" (Übertragung), by which the hysteric projects into the
objective world the illusions, or subjective values of his feelings.
In the same way I shall call "regressive introversion," the opposite
pathological phenomenon which we find in dementia præcox, where the
subject himself suffers these phantastical transfigurations.

It is obvious that these two contrary movements of the libido, as
simple psychic mechanisms, may play a part alternately in the same
individual, since after all they serve the same purpose by different
methods--namely, to minister to his well-being. Freud has taught us
that in the mechanism of hysterical transference the individual aims
at getting rid of disagreeable memories or impressions, in order to
free himself from painful complexes, by a process of "repression."
Conversely in the mechanism of introversion, the personality tends to
concentrate itself upon its complexes, and with them, to isolate itself
from external reality, by a process which is not properly speaking
"repression," but which would be better rendered perhaps by the term
"depreciation" (Entwertung) of the objective world.

The existence of two mental affections so opposite in character as
hysteria and dementia præcox, in which the contrast rests on the almost
exclusive supremacy of extroversion or introversion, suggests that these
two psychological types may exist equally well in normal persons, who
may be characterised by the relative predominance of one or other of
the two mechanisms. Psychiatrists know very well that before either
illness is fully declared, patients already present the characteristic
type, traces of which are to be found from the earliest years of life.
As Binet pointed out so well, the neurotic only accentuates and shews
in relief the characteristic traits of his personality. One knows, of
course, that the hysterical character is not simply the product of the
illness, but pre-existed it in a measure. And Hoch has shown by his
researches into the histories of his dementia præcox patients, that this
is also the case with them; dissociations or eccentricities were present
before the onset of the illness. If this is so, one may certainly expect
to meet the same contrast between psychological temperaments outside
the sphere of pathology. It is moreover easy to cull from literature
numerous examples which bear witness to the actual existence of these
two opposite types of mentality. Without pretending to exhaust the
subject, I will give a few striking examples.

In my opinion, we owe the best observations on this subject to the
philosophy of William James.[185] He lays down the principle that no
matter what may be the temperament of a "professional philosopher,"
it is this temperament which he feels himself forced to express
and to justify in his philosophy. And starting from this idea,
which is altogether in accord with the spirit of psychoanalysis,
divides philosophers into two classes: the "tender-minded," who are
only interested in the inner life and spiritual things; and the
"tough-minded," who lay most stress on material things and objective
reality. We see that these two classes are actuated by exactly opposite
tendencies of the libido: the "tender-minded" represent introversion,
the "tough-minded" extroversion.

James says that the tender-minded are characterised by rationalism;
they are men of principles and of systems, they aspire to dominate
experience and to transcend it by abstract reasoning, by their logical
deductions, and purely rational conceptions. They care little for facts,
and the multiplicity of phenomena hardly embarrasses them at all: they
forcibly fit data into their ideal constructions, and reduce everything
to their _a priori_ premises. This was the method of Hegel in settling
beforehand the number of the planets. In the domain of mental pathology
we again meet this kind of philosopher in paranoiacs, who, without
being disquieted by the flat contradictions presented by experience,
impose their delirious conceptions on the universe, and find means of
interpreting everything, and according to Adler "arranging" everything,
in conformity with their morbidly preconceived system.

The other traits which James depicts in this type follow naturally
from its fundamental character. The tender-minded man, he says, is
intellectual, idealist, optimist, religious, partisan of free-will,
a monist, and a dogmatist. All these qualities betray the almost
exclusive concentration of the libido upon the intellectual life.
This concentration upon the inner world of thought is nothing else
than introversion. In so far as experience plays a _rôle_ with these
philosophers, it serves only as an allurement or fillip to abstraction,
in response to the imperative need to fit forcibly all the chaos of the
universe within well-defined limits, which are, in the last resort, the
creation of a spirit obedient to its subjective values.

The tough-minded man is positivist and empiricist. He regards only
matters of fact. Experience is his master, his exclusive guide and
inspiration. It is only empirical phenomena demonstrable in the outside
world which count. Thought is merely a reaction to external experience.
In the eyes of these philosophers principles are never of such value
as facts; they can only reflect and describe the sequence of phenomena
and cannot construct a system. Thus their theories are exposed to
contradiction under the overwhelming accumulation of empirical material.
Psychic reality for the positivist limits itself to the observation
and experience of pleasure and pain; he does not go beyond that, nor
does he recognise the rights of philosophical thought. Remaining on the
ever-changing surface of the phenomenal world, he partakes himself of
its instability; carried away in the chaotic tumult of the universe, he
sees all its aspects, all its theoretical and practical possibilities,
but he never arrives at the unity or the fixity of a settled system,
which alone could satisfy the idealist or tender-minded. The positivist
depreciates all values in reducing them to elements lower than
themselves; he explains the higher by the lower, and dethrones it, by
showing that it is "nothing but such another thing," which has no value
in itself.

From these general characteristics, the others which James points out
logically follow. The positivist is a sensualist, giving greater value
to the specific realm of the senses than to reflection which transcends
it. He is a materialist and a pessimist, for he knows only too well the
hopeless uncertainty of the course of things. He is irreligious, not
being in a state to hold firmly to the realities of the inner world
as opposed to the pressure of external facts; he is a determinist and
fatalist, only able to show resignation; a pluralist, incapable of all
synthesis; and finally a sceptic, as a last and inevitable consequence
of all the rest.

The expressions, therefore, used by James, show clearly that the
diversity of types is the result of a different localisation of the
libido; this libido is the magic power in the depth of our being, which,
following the personality, carries it sometimes towards internal life,
and sometimes towards the objective world. James compares, for example,
the religious subjectivism of the idealist, and the quasi-religious
attitude of the contemporary empiricist: "Our esteem for facts has not
neutralised in us all religiousness. It is itself almost religious. Our
scientific temper is devout."[186]

A second parallel is furnished by Wilhelm Ostwald,[187] who divides
"savants" and men of genius into classics and romantics. The latter
are distinguished by their rapid reactions, their extremely prompt and
abundant production of ideas and projects, some of which are badly
digested and of doubtful value. They are admirable and brilliant
masters, loving to teach, of a contagious ardour and enthusiasm, which
attracts many pupils, and makes them founders of schools, exercising
great personal influence. Herein our type of extroversion is easily
recognised. The classics of Ostwald are, on the contrary, slow to react;
they produce with much difficulty, are little capable of teaching or
of exercising direct personal influence, and lacking enthusiasm are
paralysed by their own severe criticism, living apart and absorbed in
themselves, making scarcely any disciples, but producing works of
finished perfection which often bring them posthumous fame. All these
characteristics correspond to introversion.

We find a further very valuable example in the æsthetic theory of
Warringer. Borrowing from A. Riegl his expression "Volonté d'art
absolue" to express the internal force which inspires the artist, he
distinguishes two forms, viz. sympathy (Einfühlung) and abstraction;
and the term which he employs indicates that here, too, we witness the
activity of the push of the libido, the stirring of the _élan vital_.
"In the same way," says Warringer, "as the sympathetic impulse finds its
satisfaction in organic beauty, so abstract impulse discovers beauty in
the inorganic, which is the negation of all life, in crystallised forms,
and in a general manner wherever the severity of abstract law reigns."
Whilst sympathy represents the warmth of passion which carries it into
the presence of the object in order to assimilate it and penetrate
it with emotional values; abstraction, on the other hand, despoils
the object of all that could recall life, and grasps it by purely
intellectual thought, crystallised and fixed into the rigid forms of
law,--the universal, the typical. Bergson also makes use of these images
of crystallisation, solidification, etc., to illustrate the essence of
intellectual abstraction.

Warringer's "abstraction" represents the process which I have already
remarked as a consequence of introversion, namely, the exaltation of
the intellect, in the place of the depreciated reality of the external
world. "Sympathy" corresponds in fact to extroversion, for, as Lipps
has pointed out, "What I perceive sympathetically in an object is, in
a general manner life, and life is power, internal work, effort, and
execution. To live, in a word, is to act, and to act is to experience
intimately the force which we give out; experience creates activity,
which is essentially of a spontaneous character." "Æsthetic enjoyment,"
said Warringer, "is the enjoyment of one's own self projected into the
"object," a formula which corresponds absolutely with our definition of
transference. This æsthetic conception does not refer to the positivist
in James's sense; it is rather the attitude of the idealist for whom
psychological reality only is interesting, and worthy of consideration."
Warringer adds, "what is essential lies not in the gradation of the
feeling, but pre-eminently in the feeling itself; that is to say, the
inner movement, the intimate life, the unfolding of the subject's own
activity; the value of a line or of a form, depends in our eyes on the
biological value it holds for us; that which gives beauty is solely
our own vital feeling, which we unconsciously project into it." This
view corresponds exactly with my own way of understanding the theory
of the libido, in attempting to keep the true balance between the two
psychological opposites of introversion and extroversion.

The polar opposite of sympathy is abstraction. The impulse of
abstraction is conceived by Warringer "as the result of a great internal
conflict of the human soul in the presence of the external world, and
from the religious standpoint, it corresponds to a strong transcendental
colouring of all the representations man has made to himself of
reality." We recognise clearly in this definition the primordial
tendency to introversion. To the introverted type the universe does not
appear beautiful and desirable, but disquieting, and even dangerous;
it is a manifestation against which the subject puts himself on the
defensive; he entrenches himself in his inner fastness, and fortifies
himself therein by the invention of geometrical figures, full of repose,
perfectly clear even in their minutest details, the primitive magic
power of which assures him of domination over the surrounding world.

"The need of abstraction is the origin of all art," says Warringer.
Here is a great principle, which gains weighty confirmation from the
fact that precocious dements reproduce forms and figures which present
the closest analogy to those of primitive humanity, not only in their
thoughts but also in their drawings.

We should recall that Schiller had already tried to formulate the same
presentation in what he calls the naïve and sentimental types. The
latter is in quest of nature, whilst the former is itself "all nature."
Schiller also saw that these two types result from the predominance of
psychological mechanisms which might be met with in one and the same
individual. "It is not only in the same poet," he said, "but even in the
same work that these two types of mentality are found united.... The
naïve poet pursues only nature and feeling in their simplicity, and all
his effort is limited to the imitation and reproduction of reality. The
sentimental poet, on the contrary, reflects the impression he receives
from objects. The object here is allied to an idea, and the poetic power
of the work depends on this alliance." These quotations shew what types
Schiller had in view, and one recognises their fundamental identity with
those with which we are here dealing.

We find another instance in Nietzsche's contrast between the minds
of Apollo and of Dionysus. The example which Nietzsche uses to
illustrate this contrast is instructive--namely, that between a dream
and intoxication. In a dream the individual is shut up in himself, in
intoxication, on the contrary, he forgets himself to the highest degree,
and, set free from his self-consciousness, plunges into the multiplicity
of the objective world. To depict Apollo, Nietzsche borrows the words of
Schopenhauer, "As upon a tumultuous sea, which disgorges and swallows
by turns, lost to view in the mountains of foaming waves, the mariner
remains seated tranquilly on his plank, full of confidence in his frail
barque; so individual man, in a world of troubles, lives passive and
serene, relying with confidence on the principle of 'individuation.'"
"Yes," continues Nietzsche, "we might say that the unshakeable
confidence in this principle, and the calm security of those whom it has
inspired, have found in Apollo their most sublime expression, and we may
always recognise in him the most splendid and divine personification of
the principle of making an individual." The Apollien state, as Nietzsche
conceives it, is consequently the withdrawal into oneself, that is,
introversion. Conversely in the Dionysian state, psychic intoxication,
indicates in his view the unloosening of a torrent of libido which
expends itself upon things. "This is not only," says Nietzsche, "the
alliance of man with man, which finds itself confirmed afresh under
the Dionysian enchantment; it is alienated Nature, hostile or enslaved,
which also celebrates her reconciliation with her prodigal child,--man.
Spontaneously Earth offers her gifts and the wild beasts from rock and
desert draw near peacefully. The car of Dionysus is lost under flowers
and garlands; panthers and tigers approach under his yoke."

If we change Beethoven's "Hymn of Praise" into a picture, and giving
rein to our imagination, contemplate the millions of beings prostrated
and trembling in the dust, at such a moment the Dionysian intoxication
will be near at hand. Then is the slave free; then all the rigid and
hostile barriers which poverty and arbitrary or insolent custom have
established between man and man are broken down. Now, by means of this
gospel of universal harmony, each feels himself not only reunited,
reconciled, fused with his neighbour, but actually identified with him,
as if the veil of "Maïa was torn away, nothing remaining of it but a few
shreds floating before the mystery of the Primordial Unity."[188] It
would be superfluous to add comment to these quotations.

In concluding this series of examples culled outside my own special
domain, I will quote the linguistic hypothesis of Finck,[189] where we
also see the duality in question. The structure of language, according
to Finck, presents two principal types: in one the subject is generally
conceived as active: "I see him," "I strike him down;" in the other the
subject experiences and feels, and it is the object which acts: "He
appears to me," "He succumbs to me." The first type clearly shews the
libido as going out of the subject,--this is a centrifugal movement;
the second as coming out of the object,--this movement is centripetal.
We meet with this latter introverted type especially in the primitive
languages of the Esquimaux.

In the domain of psychiatry also these two types have been described
by Otto Gross,[190] who distinguishes two forms of mental debility:
the one a diffuse and shallow consciousness, the other a concentrated
and deep consciousness. The first is characterised by weakness of the
consecutive function, the second by its excessive reinforcement. Gross
has recognised that the consecutive function is in intimate relation
with affectivity, from which we might infer that he is dealing once more
with our two psychological types. The relation he establishes between
maniac depressive insanity and the state of diffuse or extended and
shallow mental disease shows that the latter represents the extroverted
type; and the relation between the psychology of the paranoiac and
repressed mentality, indicates the identity of the former with the
introverted type.

After the foregoing considerations no one will be astonished to find
that in the domain of psychoanalysis we also have to reckon with the
existence of these two psychological types.

On the one side we meet with a theory which is essentially reductive,
pluralist, causal and sensualist; this is Freud's standpoint. This
theory limits itself rigidly to empirical facts, and traces back
complexes to their antecedents and their elemental factors. It regards
the psychological life as being only an effect, a reaction to the
environment, and accords the greatest _rôle_ and the largest place to
sensation. On the other side we have the diametrically opposed theory
of Adler[191] which is an entirely philosophical and finalistic one. In
it phenomena are not reducible to earlier and very primitive factors,
but are conceived as "arrangements," the outcome of intentions and
of ends of an extremely complex nature. It is no longer the view of
causality but of finality which dominates researches: the history of the
patient and the concrete influences of the environment are of much less
importance than the dominating principles, the "fictions directrices,"
of the individual. It is not essential for him to depend upon the
object, and to find in it his fill of subjective enjoyment, but to
protect his own individuality and to guarantee it against the hostile
influences of the environment.

Whilst Freud's psychology has for its predominant note the centrifugal
tendency, which demands its happiness and satisfaction in the objective
world, in that of Adler the chief _rôle_ belongs to the centripetal
movement, which tends to the supremacy of the subject, to his triumph
and his liberty, as opposed to the overwhelming forces of existence.
The expedient to which the type described by Freud has recourse is
"infantile transference," by means of which he projects phantasy into
the object and finds a compensation for the difficulties of life in this
transfiguration. In the type described by Adler what is characteristic
is, on the contrary, the "virile protest," personal resistance, the
efficacious safeguard which the individual provides for himself, in
affirming and stubbornly enclosing himself in his dominating ideas.

The difficult task of elaborating a psychology which should pay equal
attention to the two types of mentality belongs to the future.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 183: Delivered at the Psychoanalytical Congress, Munich, 1913.
Translated from _Archives de Psychologie_, by kind permission of the
Editor, Dr. Claparède. Translator, C. E. Long.]

[Footnote 184: "The concept of energy is that which comes nearest to
the concept of libido. Libido can perhaps be described as "effect,"
or "capacity for effect." It is capable of transformation from one
form to another. The metamorphosis can be sudden, as when one function
replaces another in a moment of danger; or it can be gradual, as we
see it in the process of sublimation, where the libido is led over a
long and difficult path through a variety of forms into a different
function."--MARY MOLTZER.]

[Footnote 185: "Pragmatism," Chapter I.]

[Footnote 186: "Pragmatism," ch. i., p. 14.]

[Footnote 187: W. Ostwald "Grosse Männer," Leipzig, 1910 (11th Lecture,
"Classics and Romanticists"). See also his contribution, "A propos de la
Biologie du Savant," Bibliothèque Universelle, Oct., 1910.]

[Footnote 188: Nietzsche, "The Birth of Tragedy," trans. Wm. A.
Haussmann.]

[Footnote 189: Finck, "Der deutsche Sprachbon als Aus druck, deutscher
Weltanschauung." Marburg, 1899.]

[Footnote 190: Gross, "Die zerebrale Sekundärfonktion." Leipsig, 1902.]

[Footnote 191: Adler, "Über den nervösen Charakter." Wiesbaden, 1912.]




CHAPTER XII

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF DREAMS[192]


A dream is a psychic structure which at first sight appears to be
in striking contrast with conscious thought, because judging by its
form and substance it apparently does not lie within the continuity
of development of the conscious contents, it is not integral to it,
but is a mere external and apparently accidental occurrence. Its mode
of genesis is in itself sufficient to isolate a dream from the other
contents of the conscious, for it is a survival of a peculiar psychic
activity which takes place during sleep, and does not originate in the
manifest and clearly logical and emotional continuity of the event
experienced.

But a careful observer should have no difficulty in discovering that a
dream is not entirely severed from the continuity of the conscious, for
in almost every dream certain details are found which have their origin
in the impressions, thoughts, or states of mind of one of the preceding
days. In so far a certain continuity does exist, albeit a _retrograde_
one. But any one keenly interested in the dream problem cannot have
failed to observe that a dream has also a _progressive_ continuity--if
such an expression be permitted--since dreams occasionally exert a
remarkable influence upon the conscious mental life, even of persons
who cannot be considered superstitious or particularly abnormal. These
occasional after-effects are usually seen in a more or less distinct
change in the dreamer's frame of mind.

It is probably in consequence of this loose connection with the other
conscious contents, that the recollected dream is so extremely
unstable. Many dreams baffle all attempts at reproduction, even
immediately after waking; others can only be remembered with doubtful
accuracy, and comparatively few can be termed really distinct
and clearly reproduceable. This peculiar reaction with regard to
recollection may be understood by considering the characteristics of the
various elements combined in a dream. The combination of ideas in dreams
is essentially _phantastic_; they are linked together in a sequence
which, as a rule, is quite foreign to our current way of thinking, and
in striking contrast to the logical sequence of ideas which we consider
to be a special characteristic of conscious mental processes.

It is to this characteristic that dreams owe the common epithet of
"meaningless." Before pronouncing this verdict, we must reflect that
dreams and their chains of ideas are something that _we_ do not
understand. Such a verdict would therefore be merely a projection of our
non-comprehension upon its object. But that would not prevent its own
peculiar meaning being inherent in a dream.

In spite of the fact that for centuries endeavours have been made
to extract a prophetic meaning from dreams, Freud's discovery
is practically the first successful attempt to find their real
significance. His work merits the term "scientific," because he has
evolved a technique which, not only he, but many other investigators
also assert achieves its object, namely, the understanding of the
meaning of the dream. This meaning is not identical with the one which
the manifest dream content seems to indicate.

This is not the place for a critical discussion of Freud's psychology of
dreams. But I will try to give a brief summary of what may be regarded
as more or less established facts of dream psychology to-day.

The first question we must discuss is, whence do we deduce the
justification for attributing to dreams any other significance than the
one indicated in the unsatisfying fragmentary meaning of the manifest
dream content?

As regards this point a particularly weighty argument is the fact that
Freud discovered the hidden meaning of dreams by _empiric_ and not
_deductive_ methods. A further argument in favour of a possible hidden,
as opposed to the manifest meaning of dreams, is obtained by comparing
dream-phantasies with other phantasies (day-dreams and the like) in
one and the same individual. It is not difficult to conceive that such
day-phantasies have not merely a superficial, concrete meaning, but also
a deeper psychological meaning. It is solely on account of the brevity
that I must impose upon myself, that I do not submit materials in proof
of this. But I should like to point out that what may be said about the
meaning of phantasies, is well illustrated by an old and widely diffused
type of imaginative story, of which Æsop's Fables are typical examples,
wherein, for instance, the story is some objectively impossible phantasy
about the deeds of a lion and an ass. The concrete superficial meaning
of the fable is an impossible phantasm, but the hidden moral meaning is
plain upon reflection. It is characteristic that children are pleased
and satisfied with the exoteric meaning of the story. However, the best
argument for the existence of a hidden meaning in dreams is provided
by conscientious application of the technical procedure to solve the
manifest dream content.

This brings us to our second main point, viz.--the question of analytic
procedure. Here again I desire neither to defend nor to criticise
Freud's views and discoveries, but rather to confine myself to what seem
to me to be firmly established facts.

The fact that a dream is a psychic structure, does not give us the
slightest ground for assuming that it obeys laws and designs other than
those applicable to any other psychic structure. According to the maxim:
_principia explicandi proeter necessitatem non sunt multiplicanda_, we
have to treat dreams, in analysis, just as any other psychic structure,
until experience teaches us some better way.

We know that every psychic construction considered from the standpoint
of causality, is the resultant of previous psychic contents. Moreover,
we know also that every psychic structure, considered from the
standpoint of finality, has its own peculiar meaning and purpose in the
actual psychic process. This standard must also be applied to dreams.
When, therefore, we seek a psychological explanation of a dream, we
must first know what were the preceding experiences out of which it is
combined. We must trace the antecedents of every element in the dream
picture. For example: some one dreams "_that he is walking in a street,
a child is running in front of him, who is suddenly run over by a
motor-car_." We will trace the antecedents of this dream-picture, with
the aid of the dreamer's recollections.

He recognises the street as one down which he had walked on the previous
day. The child he acknowledges as his brother's child, whom he had seen
on the previous evening when visiting his brother. The motor accident
reminds him of an accident that had actually occurred a few days before,
but of which he had only read an account in a newspaper. Popular opinion
is known to be satisfied with this kind of explanation. People say: "Oh,
that is why I dreamt such and such a thing!"

Obviously this explanation is absolutely unsatisfactory from a
scientific standpoint. The dreamer walked down many streets on the
previous day; why was this particular one selected? He had read
about several accidents; why did he select just this one? The mere
disclosure of an antecedent is by no means sufficient; for a plausible
determination of the dream presentation can only be obtained from the
competition of various determinants. The collection of additional
material proceeds, according to the principle of recollection that
has been called the _Association Method_. The result, as will easily
be understood, is the admission of a mass of multifarious and quite
heterogeneous material, having apparently nothing in common but the fact
of its evident associative connection with the dream contents, since it
has been reproduced by means of this content.

How far the collection of such material should go, is an important
question from the technical point of view. Since the entire psychic
content of a life may be ultimately disclosed from any single starting
point, theoretically the whole previous life-experience might be found
in every dream. But we only need to assemble just so much material as
is absolutely necessary in order to comprehend the dream's meaning.
The limitation of the material is obviously an arbitrary proceeding,
according to that principle of Kant's whereby to _comprehend_ is "_to
perceive to the extent necessary for our purpose_." For instance, when
undertaking a survey of the causes of the French Revolution, we could,
in amassing our material, include not only the history of medieval
France but also that of Rome and Greece, which certainly would not be
"necessary for our purpose," since we can comprehend the historical
genesis of the Revolution from much more limited material.

Except for the aforesaid arbitrary limitation, the collecting of
material lies outside the investigator's discretion. The material
gathered must now be sifted and examined, according to principles which
are always applied to the examination of historical or any empirical
scientific material. The method is an essentially comparative one, that
obviously cannot be applied automatically, but is largely dependent upon
the skill and aim of the investigator.

When a psychological fact has to be explained, it must be remembered
that psychological data necessitate a twofold point of view, namely,
that of _causality_ and that of _finality_. I use the word finality
intentionally, in order to avoid confusion with the idea of "teleology."
I use finality to denote immanent psychological teleology. In so far
as we apply the view point of causality to the material that has been
associated with the dream, we reduce the manifest dream content to
certain fundamental tendencies or ideas. These, as one would expect, are
elementary and universal in character.

For instance, a young patient dreams as follows: "_I am standing in a
strange garden, and pluck an apple from a tree. I look about cautiously,
to make sure no one sees me._"

The associated dream material is a memory of having once, when a boy,
plucked a couple of pears surreptitiously from another person's garden.

The feeling of having a bad conscience, which is a prominent feature in
the dream, reminds him of a situation he experienced on the previous
day. He met a young lady in the street--a casual acquaintance--and
exchanged a few words with her. At that moment a gentleman passed whom
he knew, whereupon our patient was suddenly seized with a curious
feeling of embarrassment, as if he had done something wrong. He
associated the apple with the scene in Paradise, together with the fact
that he had never really understood why the eating of the forbidden
fruit should have been fraught with such dire consequences for our first
parents. This had always made him feel angry; it seemed to him an unjust
act of God, for God had made men as they were, with all their curiosity
and greed.

Another association was, that sometimes his father had punished him for
certain things in a way that seemed to him incomprehensible. The worst
punishment had been bestowed after he had secretly watched girls bathing.

That led up to the confession that he had recently begun a love affair
with a housemaid, but had not yet carried it through to a conclusion. On
the day before the dream he had had a _rendezvous_ with her.

Upon reviewing this material we see that the dream contains a very
transparent reference to the last-named incident. The connecting
associative material shows that the apple episode is palpably meant for
an erotic scene. For various other reasons, too, it may be considered
extremely probable that this experience of the previous day is operative
even in this dream. In the dream the young man plucks the apple of
Paradise, which in reality he has not yet plucked. The remainder of the
material associated with the dream is concerned with another experience
of the previous day, namely, with the peculiar feeling of a _bad
conscience_, which seized the dreamer when he was talking to his casual
lady acquaintance; this, again, was connected with the fall of man in
Paradise, and finally with an erotic misdemeanour of his childhood, for
which his father had punished him severely. All these associations are
linked together by the idea of _guilt_.

In the first place we will consider this material from Freud's
view-point of causality; in other words, we will "interpret" it, to use
Freud's expression. A wish has been left unfulfilled from the day before
the dream. In the dream this wish is realised in the _symbolical_ apple
scene. But why is this realisation disguised and hidden under a symbolic
image instead of being expressed in a distinctly sexual thought? Freud
would refer to the unmistakable sense of guilt shown up by the material,
and say the morality that has been inculcated in the young man from
childhood is bent on repressing such wishes, and to that end brands the
natural craving as immoral and reprehensible. The suppressed immoral
thought can therefore only achieve expression by means of a _symbol_. As
these thoughts are incompatible with the moral content of the conscious
ego, a psychic factor adopted by Freud called the _Censor_, prevents
this wish from passing undisguised into consciousness.

Reviewing the dream from the standpoint of finality, which I contrast
with that of Freud, does not--as I wish to establish explicitly--involve
a denial of the dream's _causæ_, but rather a different interpretation
of the associative material collected around the dream. The material
facts remain the same, but the standard by which they are measured is
altered. The question may be formulated simply as follows: What is
this dream's purpose? What should it effect? These questions are not
arbitrary, in as much as they may be applied to every psychic activity.
Everywhere the question of the "why" and "wherefore" may be raised.

It is clear that the material added by the dream to the previous day's
erotic experience, chiefly emphasises the sense of guilt in the erotic
act. The same association has already been shown to be operative
in another experience of the previous day, in the meeting with his
casual lady acquaintance, when the feeling of a bad conscience was
automatically and inexplicably aroused, as if, in that instance, too,
the young man had done something wrong. This experience also plays a
part in the dream, which is even intensified by the association of
additional, appropriate material; the erotic experience of the day
before, being depicted by the story of the Fall which was followed by
such a severe punishment.

I maintain that there exists in the dreamer an unconscious propensity
or _tendency to conceive his erotic experiences as guilty_. It is most
characteristic that the association with the Fall of Man should ensue,
the young man having never really grasped why the punishment should
have been so drastic. This association throws light upon the reasons
why the dreamer did not think simply, "I am doing what is not right."
Obviously he does not _know_ that he might condemn his own conduct as
morally wrong. This is actually the case. His conscious belief is that
his conduct does not matter in the least morally, as all his friends
were acting in the same way; besides, for other reasons too, is unable
to understand why a fuss should be made about it.

Whether this dream should be considered full or void of meaning depends
upon a very important question, viz. whether the standpoint of morality,
handed down to us through the ages by our forefathers is held to be full
or void of meaning. I do not wish to wander off into a philosophical
discussion of this question, but would merely observe that mankind must
obviously have had very strong reasons for devising this morality,
otherwise it would be truly incomprehensible why such restraints should
be imposed upon one of man's strongest cravings. If we attach due
value to this fact, we are bound to pronounce this dream to be full of
meaning, for it reveals to the young man the necessity of facing his
erotic conduct boldly from the view point of morality. Primitive races
have in some respects extremely strict legislation concerning sexuality.
This fact proves that sexual morality is a not-to-be-neglected factor
in the soul's higher functions, but deserves to be taken fully into
account. In the case in question it should be added, that the young
man--influenced by his friends' example--somewhat thoughtlessly let
himself be guided exclusively by his erotic cravings, unmindful of
the fact that man is a morally responsible being and must perforce
submit--voluntarily or involuntarily--to a morality that he himself has
created.

In this dream we can discern a compensating function of the unconscious,
consisting in the fact that _those thoughts, propensities, and
tendencies of a human personality, which in conscious life are too
seldom recognised, come spontaneously into action in the sleeping state,
when to a large extent the conscious process is disconnected_.

The question might certainly be raised, of what use is this to the
dreamer if he does not understand the dream?

To this I must remark that to understand is not an exclusively
intellectual process, for--as experience proves--man may be
influenced--nay, even very effectually convinced--by innumerable things,
of which he has no intellectual understanding. I will merely remind my
readers of the efficacy of religious symbols.

The example given above might suggest the thought that the function
of dreams is a distinctly "moral" one. Such it appears to be in this
case, but if we recall the formula according to which dreams contain
the subliminal materials of a given moment, we cannot speak simply of
a "moral" function. For it is worthy of note that the dreams of those
persons whose actions are morally unexceptionable, bring materials to
light that might well be characterised as "immoral" in the current
meaning of that term. Thus it is significant that St. Augustine was glad
that God did not hold him responsible for his dreams. The unconscious
is the unknown of a given moment, therefore it is not surprising that
all those aspects that are essential for a totally different point of
view should be added by dreams to the conscious psychological factors of
a given moment. It is evident that this function of dreams signifies a
psychological adjustment, a compensation essential for properly balanced
action. In the conscious process of reflection it is indispensable that,
so far as possible, we should realise all the aspects and consequences
of a problem, in order to find the right solution. This process is
continued automatically in the more or less unconscious state of sleep,
wherever--as our previous experience seems to show--all those other
points of view occur to the dreamer (at least by way of allusion) that
during the day were underestimated or even totally ignored; in other
words, were comparatively unconscious.

As regards the much-discussed _symbolism_ of dreams, the value attached
to it varies according to whether the standpoint of causality or of
finality is adopted. According to Freud's causal view point it proceeds
from a _craving_, viz. from the suppressed dream-wish. This craving is
always somewhat simple and primitive, and is able to disguise itself
under manifold forms. For instance, the young man in question might just
as well have dreamt that he had to open a door with a key, or that he
had to travel by aeroplane, or that he was kissing his mother, etc. From
this standpoint all those things would have had the same meaning. In
this way, the typical adherents of Freud's school have come to the point
of interpreting--to give a gross instance--almost all long objects in
dreams as phallic symbols.

From the view-point of finality, the various dream pictures have each
their own peculiar value. For instance, if the young man, instead of
dreaming of the apple scene, had dreamt he had to open a door with
a key, the altered dream picture would have furnished associative
material of an essentially different character; that, again, would have
resulted in the conscious situation being supplemented by associations
of a totally different kind from those connected with the apple scene.
From this point of view, it is the diversity of the dream's mode of
expression that is full of meaning, and not the uniformity in its
significance. The causal view-point tends by its very nature towards
uniformity of meaning, that is, towards a fixed significance of symbols.
On the other hand, the final view-point perceives in an altered dream
picture, the expression of an altered psychological situation. It
recognises no fixed meaning of symbols. From this standpoint all the
dream pictures are important in themselves, each one having a special
significance of its own, to which it owes its inclusion in the dream.
Keeping to our previous example, we see that from the standpoint of
finality the symbol in this dream is approximately equivalent to a
parable; it does not conceal, but it teaches. The apple scene recalls
vividly the sense of guilt, at the same time disguising the real deed of
our first parents.

It is obvious we reach very dissimilar interpretations of the meaning
of the dream, according to the point of view adopted. The question
now arises, which is the better or truer version? After all, for us
therapeuts it is a practical and not a merely theoretical necessity
that leads us to seek for some comprehension of the meaning of dreams.
In treating our patients we must for practical reasons endeavour to lay
hold of any means that will enable us to train them effectually. It
should be quite evident from the foregoing example, that the material
associated with the dream has opened up a question calculated to make
many matters clear to the young man, which, hitherto, he has heedlessly
overlooked. But by disregarding these things he was really overlooking
something in himself, for he possesses a moral standard and a moral
need just like any other man. By trying to live without taking this
fact into consideration, his life is one-sided and incomplete, so to
say inco-ordinate; with the same consequences for the psychological
life as a one-sided and incomplete diet would have for the physical.
In order to develop a person's individuality and independence to the
uttermost, we need to bring to fruition all those functions that have
hitherto attained but little conscious development or none at all. In
order to achieve this aim, we must for therapeutic reasons enter into
all those unconscious aspects of things brought forward by the dream
material. This makes it abundantly clear that the view-point of finality
is singularly important as an aid to the practical development of the
individual.

The view-point of causality is obviously more in accord with the
scientific spirit of our time, with its strictly causalistic reasoning.
Much may be said for Freud's view as a scientific explanation of dream
psychology. But I must dispute its completeness, for the psyche cannot
be conceived merely from the causal aspect, but necessitates also a
final view-point. Only a combination of both points of view--which has
not yet been attained to the satisfaction of the scientific mind, owing
to great difficulties both of a practical and theoretical nature--can
give us a more complete conception of the essence of dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *

I would like to treat briefly of some further problems of dream
psychology, that border on the general discussion of dreams. Firstly,
as to the _classification of dreams_; I do not wish to overestimate
either the practical or theoretical significance of this question. I
investigate yearly some 1500-2000 dreams, and this experience enables
me to state that typical dreams actually do exist. But they are not
very frequent, and from the view-point of finality they lose much
of the importance which attaches to them as a result of the fixed
significance of symbols according to the causal view-point. It seems to
me that the _typical themes_ of dreams are of far greater importance,
for they permit of a comparison with the themes of mythology. Many of
these mythological themes--in the study of which Frobenius has rendered
notable service--are also found in dreams, often with precisely the
same significance. Unfortunately the limited time at my disposal,
does not permit me to lay detailed materials before you: this has
been done elsewhere.[193] But I desire to emphasise the fact that the
comparison of the typical themes of dreams with those of mythology
obviously suggests the idea (already put forward by Nietzsche) that from
a phylogenetic point of view dream-thought should be conceived as an
older form of thought. Instead of multiplying examples in explanation
of my meaning, I will briefly refer you to our specimen dream. As
you remember, that dream introduced the apple scene as a typical
representation of erotic guilt. The gist of its purport is: "I am doing
wrong in acting like this." But it is characteristic that a dream never
expresses itself in a logically abstract way, but always in the language
of parable or simile. This peculiarity is also a characteristic feature
of primitive languages, whose flowery idioms always strike us. If you
call to mind the writings of ancient literature--_e.g._ the language of
simile in the Bible--you will find that what nowadays is expressed by
means of abstract expressions, could then only be expressed by means
of simile. Even such a philosopher as Plato did not disdain to express
certain fundamental ideas by means of concrete simile.

Just as the body bears traces of its phylogenetic development, so also
does the human mind. There is therefore nothing surprising in the
possibility of the allegories of our dreams being a survival of archaic
modes of thought.

The theft of the apple in our example is a typical theme of dreams,
often recurring with various modifications. It is also a well-known
theme in mythology, and is found not only in the story of the Garden of
Eden, but in numerous myths and fables of all ages and climes. It is one
of those universally human symbols, which can reappear in any one, at
any time. Thus, dream psychology opens up a way to a general comparative
psychology, from which we hope to attain the same sort of understanding
of the development and structure of the human soul, as comparative
anatomy has given us concerning the human body.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 192: This lecture was prepared for the Berne Medical Congress,
1914, postponed on the outbreak of war. Translator, Dora Hecht.]

[Footnote 193: "The Psychology of the Unconscious" ("Wandlungen und
Symbole der Libido"). Moffat, Yard & Co.]




CHAPTER XIII

THE CONTENT OF THE PSYCHOSES[194]


INTRODUCTION

My short sketch on the Content of the Psychoses which first appeared
in the series of "Schriften zur Angewandten Seelenkunde" under
Freud's editorship was designed to give the non-professional but
interested public some insight into the psychological point of view
of recent psychiatry. I chose by way of example a case of the mental
disorder known as Dementia Præcox, which Bleuler calls Schizophrenia.
Statistically this extensive group contains by far the largest number
of cases of psychosis. Many psychiatrists would prefer to limit it, and
accordingly make use of other nomenclature and classification. From the
psychological standpoint the change of name is unimportant, for it is
of less value to know what a thing is called than to know what it is.
The cases of mental disorder sketched in this essay belong to well-known
and frequently occurring types, familiar to the alienist. The facts will
not be altered if these disorders are called by some other name than
dementia præcox.

I have presented my view of the psychological basis in a work[195]
whose scientific validity has been contested upon all sorts of grounds.
For me it is sufficient justification that a psychiatrist of Bleuler's
standing has fully accepted, in his great monograph on the disease,
all the essential points in my work. The difference between us is as
to the question whether, in relation to the anatomical basis, the
psychological disorders should be regarded as primary or secondary. The
resolution of this weighty question depends upon the general problem as
to whether the prevailing dogma in psychiatry--"disorders of the mind
are disorders of the brain"--presents a final truth or not. This dogma
leads to absolute sterility as soon as universal validity is ascribed
to it. There are undoubted psychogenic mental diseases (the so-called
hysterical) which are properly regarded as _functional_ in contrast
with organic diseases which rest upon demonstrable anatomical changes.
Disorders of the brain should only be called organic when the psychic
symptoms depend upon an undoubtedly primary disease of the brain. Now
in dementia præcox this is by no means a settled question. Definite
anatomical changes are present, but we are very far from being able to
relate the psychological symptoms to these changes. We have, at least,
positive information as to the functional nature of early schizophrenic
conditions; moreover the organic character of paranoia and many paranoid
forms is still in great uncertainty. This being so it is worth while
to inquire whether manifestations of degeneration could not also be
provoked by psychological disturbance of function. Such an idea is only
incomprehensible to those who smuggle materialistic preconceptions into
their scientific theories. This question does not even rest upon some
fundamental and arbitrary spiritualism, but upon the following simple
reflection. Instead of assuming that some hereditary disposition, or a
toxæmia, gives rise directly to organic processes of disease, I incline
to the view that upon the basis of predisposition, whose nature is
at present unknown to us, there arises a non-adaptable psychological
function which can proceed to develop into manifest mental disorder;
this may secondarily determine organic degeneration with its own train
of symptoms. In favour of this conception is the fact that we have no
proof of the primary nature of the organic disorder, but overwhelming
proofs exist of a primary psychological fault in function, whose history
can be traced back to the patient's childhood. In perfect agreement
with this conception is the fact that analytic practice has given us
experience of cases where patients on the borderline of dementia præcox
have been brought back to normal life.

Even if anatomical lesions or organic symptoms were constantly present,
science ought not to imagine the psychological standpoint could
advisedly be neglected, or the undoubted psychological relationship
be given up as unimportant. If, for instance, carcinoma were to prove
an infectious disease the peculiar growth and degenerative process
of carcinomatous cells would still be a constant factor requiring
investigation on its own account. But, as I have said, the correlation
between the anatomical findings and the psychological picture of
the disease is so loose that it is extremely desirable to study the
psychological side of it thoroughly.


PART I

Psychiatry is the stepchild of medicine. All the other branches of
medicine have one great advantage over it--the scientific methods can be
applied; there are things to be seen, and felt, physical and chemical
methods of investigation to be followed: the microscope shows the
dreaded bacillus, the surgeon's knife halts at no difficulty and gives
us glimpses of most inaccessible organs of vital importance. Psychiatry,
which engages in the exploration of the mind, stands ever at the door
seeking in vain to weigh and measure as in the other departments of
science. We have long known that we have to do with a definite organ,
the brain; but only beyond the brain, beyond the morphological basis
do we reach what is important for us--the mind; as indefinable as it
ever was, still eluding any explanation, no matter how ingenious.
Former ages, endowing the mind with substance, and personifying every
incomprehensible occurrence in nature, regarded mental disorder as the
work of evil spirits; the patient was looked upon as one possessed,
and the methods of treatment were such as fitted this conception. This
mediæval conception occasionally gains credence and expression even
to-day. A classical example is the driving out of the devil which
the elder Pastor Blumhardt carried out successfully in the famous
case of Gottlieb in Deltus.[196] To the honour of the Middle Ages
let it also be said that there are to be found early evidences of a
sound rationalism. In the sixteenth century at the Julius Hospital in
Würzburg mental patients were already treated side by side with others
physically ill, and the treatment seems to have been really humane.
With the opening of the modern era, and with the dawn of the first
scientific ideas, the original barbaric personification of the unknown
Great Power gradually disappeared. A change arose in the conception of
mental disease in favour of a more philosophic moral attitude. The old
view that every misfortune was the revenge of the offended gods returned
new-clothed to fit the times. Just as physical diseases can, in many
cases, be regarded as self-inflicted on account of negligence, mental
diseases were likewise considered to be due to some moral injury, or
sin. Behind this conception the angry godhead also stood. Such views
played a great _rôle_, right up to the beginning of last century,
especially in Germany. In France, however, about the same time a new
idea was appearing, destined to sway psychiatry for a hundred years.
Pinel, whose statue fittingly stands at the gateway of the Salpetrière
in Paris, took away the chains from the insane and thus freed them from
the symbol of the criminal. In a very real way he formulated for the
world the humane and scientific conception of modern times. A little
later Esquirol and Bayle discovered that certain forms of insanity ended
in death, after a relatively short time, and that certain constant
changes in the brain could be demonstrated _post mortem_. Esquirol had
described as an entity general paralysis of the insane, or as it was
popularly called "softening of the brain," a disease which is always
bound up with chronic inflammatory degeneration of the cerebral matter.
Thus was laid the foundation of the dogma which you will find repeated
in every text-book of psychiatry, viz. "diseases of the mind are
diseases of the brain." Confirmation of this conception was added about
the same time by Gall's discoveries which traced partial or complete
loss of the power of speech--a psychical capacity--to a lesion in the
region of the left lower frontal convolution. Somewhat later this view
proved to be of general applicability. Innumerable cases of extreme
idiocy or other intense mental disorders were found to be caused by
tumours of the brain. Towards the end of the nineteenth century Wernicke
(recently deceased) localised the speech centre in the left temporal
lobe. This epoch-making discovery raised hopes to the highest pitch.
It was expected that at no distant day every characteristic and every
psychical activity would be assigned a place in the cortical grey
matter. Gradually, increased attempts were made to trace the primary
mental changes in the psychoses back to certain parallel changes in the
brain. Meynert, the famous Viennese psychiatrist, described a formal
scheme in which the alteration in blood-supply in certain regions was
to play the chief part in the origin of the psychoses. Wernicke made a
similar but far more ingenious attempt at a morphological explanation
of psychical disorders. The visible result of this tendency is seen in
the fact that even the smallest and least renowned asylum has, to-day,
its anatomical laboratory where cerebral sections are cut, stained, and
microscoped. Our numerous psychiatric journals are full of morphological
contributions, investigations into the structure and distribution of
cells in the cortex, and other varying source of disorders in the
different mental diseases.

Psychiatry has come into fame as gross materialism. And quite rightly,
for it is on the road--or rather reached it long ago--to put the organ,
the instrument, above function. Function has become the dependent
accessory of its organs, the mind the dependent accessory of the brain.
In modern mental therapy the mind has been the loser, whilst great
progress has been made in cerebral anatomy; of the mind we know less
than nothing. Current psychiatry behaves like a man who thinks he can
unriddle the meaning and importance of a building by a mineralogical
investigation of its stones. Let us attempt to realise in which mental
diseases obvious changes in the brain are found, and what is their
proportion.

In the last four years we have received 1325 patients at Burgholzi;[197]
331 a year. Of these 9 per cent. suffered from congenital psychic
anomalies. By this is understood a certain inborn defect of the psyche.
Of these 9 per cent., about a quarter were imbeciles. Here we meet
certain changes in the brain such as microcephalus, hydrocephalus,
malformations or absence of portions of the brain. The remaining
three-quarters of these congenital defects present no typical changes in
the brain.

Three per cent. of our patients suffer from epileptic mental troubles.
In the course of epilepsy there arises gradually a typical degeneration
of the brain. The degeneration is, however, only discoverable in severe
cases and when the disease has existed for some time. If the attacks
have only existed for a relatively short time, not more than a few
years, the brain as a rule shows nothing. Seventeen per cent. of our
patients suffer from progressive paralysis and senile dementia. Both
diseases present characteristic changes in the brain. In paralysis there
is most extensive shrinkage of the brain, so that the cortex is often
reduced by one half. The frontal portions of the brain more especially,
may be reduced to a third of the normal weight. There is a similar
destruction of substance in senile decay.

Fourteen per cent. of the patients annually received are cases of
poisoning, at least 13 per cent. of these being due to alcohol. As a
rule in slight cases nothing is to be found in the brain; in only a
relatively few severe cases is there shrinkage of the cortex, generally
of slight degree. The number of these severe cases amounts to less than
1 per cent. of the yearly cases of alcoholism.

Six per cent. of the patients suffer from so-called maniacal depressive
insanity which includes the maniacs and the melancholics. The essence
of this disease is readily intelligible to the public. Melancholia is
a condition of abnormal sadness without disorder of intelligence or
memory. Mania is the opposite, the rule being an abnormally excited
state with great restlessness; likewise without deep disturbance of
intelligence and memory. In this disease there are no demonstrable
morphological changes in the brain.

Forty-five per cent. of the patients suffer from the real and common
mental disease called dementia præcox. The name is a very unhappy one,
for the dementia is not always precocious, nor in all cases is there
dementia. Unfortunately the disease is too often incurable; even in the
best cases, in those that recover, where the outside public would not
observe any abnormality, there is always present some defect in the
emotional life. The picture presented by the disease is extraordinarily
diverse; generally there is some disorder of feeling, frequently
delusions and hallucinations. As a rule there is nothing to be found in
the brain. Even in cases of a most severe type, lasting for years, an
intact brain is not infrequently found _post mortem_. In a few cases
only certain slight changes are present which, however, cannot as yet be
reduced to any law.

To sum up: in round figures a quarter of our insane patients show more
or less clearly extensive changes and destruction of the brain, while
three-fourths have a brain which seems to be generally unimpaired or at
most exhibit such changes as give no explanation of the psychological
disturbance.

These figures offer the best possible proof that the purely
morphological view-point of modern psychiatry leads only very
indirectly, if at all, to the understanding of the mental disorder,
which is our aim. We must take into account the fact that those mental
diseases which show the most marked disturbances of the brain end in
death; for this reason the chronic inmates of the asylum form its real
population, consisting of some 70 to 80 per cent. of cases of dementia
præcox, that is, of patients in whom anatomical changes are practically
non-existent. The psychiatry of the future must come to grips with the
core of the thing; the path is thus made clear--_it can only be by way
of psychology_. Hence in our Zürich clinic we have entirely discarded
the anatomical view and turned to the psychological investigation of
insanity. As most of our patients suffer from dementia præcox we were
naturally concerned with this as our chief problem.

       *       *       *       *       *

The older asylum physicians paid great attention to the psychological
precursors of mental disorder, just as the public still does, following
a true instinct. We accepted this hint and carefully investigated the
previous psychological history wherever possible. Our trouble was richly
rewarded, for we often found, to our surprise, that the disease broke
out at a moment of some great emotion which, in its turn, had arisen in
a so-called normal way. We found, moreover, that in the mental disease
which ensued a number of symptoms occurred which it was quite labour in
vain to study from the morphological standpoint. These same symptoms,
however, were comprehensible when considered from the standpoint of the
individual's previous history. Freud's fundamental investigations into
the psychology of hysteria and dreams afforded us the greatest stimulus
and help in our work.

A few instances of the latest method in psychiatry will make the
subject clearer than mere dry theory. In order to bring home to you the
difference in our conception I will first describe the medical history
in the older fashion, and subsequently give the solution characteristic
of the new departure.

The case to be considered is that of a cook aged 32; she had no
hereditary taint, was always industrious and conscientious, and had
never been noticeable for eccentric behaviour or the like. Quite
recently she became acquainted with a young man whom she wished to
marry. From that time on she began to show certain peculiarities. She
often spoke of his not liking her much, was frequently out of sorts,
ill-tempered, and sat alone brooding; once she ornamented her Sunday hat
very strikingly with red and green feathers, another day she bought a
pair of pince-nez in order to wear them when she went out walking with
her fiancé. One day the sudden idea that her teeth were rather ugly
would not let her rest, and she resolved to get a plate, although there
was no absolute need. She had all her teeth out under an anæsthetic. The
night after the operation she suddenly had a severe anxiety-attack. She
cried and moaned that she was damned for ever, for she had committed
a great sin; she should not have allowed her teeth to be extracted.
People must pray for her, that God might pardon her sin. In vain her
friends attempted to talk her out of her fears, to assure her that the
extraction of teeth was really no sin; it availed nothing. At day-break
she became somewhat quieter; she worked throughout the day. On following
nights the attacks were repeated. When consulted by the patient I found
her quiet, but she wore a rather vacant expression. I talked to her
about the operation, and she assured me it was not so dreadful to have
teeth extracted, but still it was a great sin, from which position,
despite every persuasion, she could not be moved. She continually
repeated in plaintive, pathetic tones, "I should not have allowed my
teeth to be extracted; oh yes, that was a great sin which God will never
forgive me." She gave the impression of real insanity. A few days later
her condition grew worse, and she had to be brought into the asylum. The
anxiety-attack had extended and was persistent, and the mental disorder
lasted for months.

The history shows a series of entirely unrelated symptoms. Why all the
queer story of the hat and pince-nez? Why those anxiety-attacks? Why
this delusion that the extraction of her teeth was an unpardonable
sin? Nothing here is clear. The morphologically-minded psychiatrist
would say: This is just a typical case of dementia præcox; it is the
essence of insanity, of madness, to talk of nothing but mysteries;
the standpoint of the diseased mind towards the world is displaced,
is "mad." What is no sin for the normal, the patient finds a sin.
It is a bizarre delusion characteristic of dementia præcox. The
extravagant lamentation about this supposed sin is what is known as
"inadequate"[198] emotional emphasis. The queer ornamentation of the
hat, the pince-nez, are bizarre notions such as are very common in
these patients. Somewhere in the brain certain cells have fallen into
disorder, and manufacture illogical, senseless ideas of one kind and
another which are quite without psychological meaning. The patient is
obviously a hereditary degenerate with a weak brain, having a kink
which is the origin of the disorder. For some reason or other the
disease has suddenly broken out. It could just as easily have broken
out at any other time. Perhaps we should have had to capitulate to
these arguments had real psychological analysis not come to our aid. In
filling up the certificate required for her removal to the asylum, it
transpired that many years ago she had had an affair which terminated;
her lover left her with an illegitimate child. Nobody had been told of
this. When she was again in love a dilemma arose, and she asked herself,
What will this new lover say about it? At first she postponed the
marriage, becoming more and more worried, and then the eccentricities
began. To understand these we must immerse ourselves in the psychology
of a naïve soul. If we have to disclose some painful secret to a beloved
person we try first to strengthen his love in order to obtain beforehand
a guarantee of his forgiveness. We do it by flattery or by caresses, or
we try to impress the value of our own personality in order to raise it
in the eyes of the other. Our patient decked herself out with beautiful
feathers, which to her simple taste seemed precious. The wearing of
"pince-nez" increases the respect of children even of a mature age.
And who does not know people who will have their teeth extracted, out
of pure vanity, in order that they may wear a plate to improve their
appearance?

After such an operation most people have a slight, nervous reaction, and
then everything becomes more difficult to bear. This was, as a matter
of fact, just the moment when the catastrophe did occur, in her terror
lest her fiancé should break with her when he heard of her previous
life. That was the first anxiety-attack. Just as the patient had not
acknowledged her secret in all these years, so she now sought to guard
it, and shifted the fear in her guilty conscience on to the extraction
of the teeth; she thus followed a method well known to us, for when we
dare not acknowledge some great sin we deplore some small sin with the
greater emphasis.

The problem seemed insoluble to the weak and sensitive mind of the
patient, hence the affect became insurmountably great; this is the
mental desire as presented from the psychological side. The series
of apparently meaningless events, the so-called madness, have now a
meaning; a significance appertains to the delusions, making the patient
more human to us. Here is a person like ourselves, beset by universal
human problems, no longer merely a cerebral machine thrown out of gear.
Hitherto we thought that the insane patient revealed nothing to us by
symptoms, save the senseless products of his disordered cerebral cells,
but that was academic wisdom reeking of the study. When we penetrate
into the human secrets of our patients, we recognise mental disease
to be an unusual reaction to emotional problems which are in no wise
foreign to ourselves, and the delusion discloses the psychological
system upon which it is based.

The light which shines forth from this conception seems to us so
enormously powerful because it forces us into the innermost depths
of that tremendous disorder which is most common in our asylums, and
hitherto least understood; by reason of the craziness of the symptoms it
is the type that strikes the public as madness _in excelsis_.

The case which I have just sketched is a simple one. It is transparent.
My second example is somewhat more complicated. It is the case of a man
between 30 and 40 years of age; he is a foreign archæologist of great
learning and most unusual intelligence. He was a precocious boy of quite
excellent character, great sensitiveness and rare gifts. Physically he
was small, always weakly, and a stammerer. He grew up and was educated
abroad, and afterwards studied for several terms at B----. So far there
had been no disorder of any kind. On the completion of his university
career he became zealously absorbed in his archæological work, which
gradually engulfed him to such an extent that he was dead to the world
and all its pleasures. He worked incessantly, and buried himself
entirely in his books. He became quite unsociable; before, awkward and
shy in society, he now fled from it altogether, and saw no one beyond
a few friends. He thus led the life of a hermit devoted entirely to
science. A few years later, on a holiday tour, he revisited B----,
where he remained a few days. He walked a great deal in the environs
of the town. His few acquaintances now found him somewhat strange,
taciturn, and nervous. After a somewhat protracted walk he seemed tired,
and said that he did not feel very well. He then remarked he must get
himself hypnotised, he felt his nerves unsteady. On top of this he was
attacked by physical illness, viz. inflammation of the lungs. Very
soon a peculiar state of excitement supervened which led to suicidal
ideas. He was brought to the asylum, where for weeks he remained in
an extremely excited state. He was completely deranged, and did not
know where he was; he spoke in broken sentences which no one could
understand. He was often so excited and aggressive that it took several
attendants to hold him. He gradually became quieter, and one day came to
himself, as if waking out of a long, confused dream. He soon completely
regained his health, and was discharged as cured. He returned to his
home and again immersed himself in books. In the following years he
published several remarkable works, but, as before, his life was that
of a hermit living entirely in his books and dead to the world. He then
gradually acquired the name of a dried-up misanthrope, lost to all
meaning of the beauty of life. A few years after his first illness a
brief holiday brought him again to B----. As before he took his solitary
walks in the environs. One day he was suddenly overcome by a faint
feeling, and lay down in the street. He was carried into a neighbouring
house where he immediately became extremely excited. He began to perform
gymnastics, jumped over the rails of the bed, turned somersaults in the
room, began to declaim in a loud, voice, sang his own improvisations,
etc. He was again brought to the asylum. The excitement continued. He
extolled his wonderful muscles, his beautiful figure, his enormous
strength. He believed that he had discovered a natural law by which
a wonderful voice could be developed. He regarded himself as a great
singer, and a marvellous reciter, and at the same time he was a great
inspired poet and composer to whom verse and melody came spontaneously.

All this was in pitiable and very remarkable contrast to reality. He is
a small weakly man of unimposing build, with poorly developed muscles
betraying at the first glance the atrophying effect of his studious
life. He is unmusical, his voice is weak and he sings out of tune; he is
a bad speaker, because of his stutter. For weeks he occupied himself in
the asylum with peculiar jumping, and contortions of the body which he
called gymnastics, he sang and declaimed. Then he became more quiet and
dreamy, often stared thoughtfully in front of him for a long time, now
and then sang a love song which, despite its want of musical expression,
betrayed a pretty feeling for love's aspirations. This also was in
complete contrast with the dryness and isolation of his normal life. He
gradually became accessible for lengthy conversations.

We will break off the history of the disease here, and sum up what is
furnished so far by observation of the patient.

In the first illness the delirium broke out unexpectedly, and was
followed by a mental disorder with confused ideas and violence which
lasted for several weeks. Complete recovery appeared to have taken
place. Six years later there was a sudden outbreak of mania, grandiose
delusions, bizarre actions, followed by a twilight-stage gradually
leading to recovery. Here we again see a typical case of dementia
præcox, of the katatonic variety, especially characterised by peculiar
movements and actions. In psychiatry the views obtaining at present
would regard this as localised cellular disease of some part of the
cortex, exhibiting confusional states, delusions of grandeur, peculiar
contortions of the muscles, or twilight-states, which taken all together
have as little psychological meaning as the bizarre shapes of a drop of
lead thrown into water.

This is not my view. It was certainly no accidental freak of the
brain-cells that created the dramatic contrasts shown in the second
illness. We can see that these contrasts, the so-called grandiose
delusions, were very subtly determined by the deficiencies in the
patient's personality. Without doubt, any one of us would naturally
regard these deficiencies seriously in ourselves. Who would not have
the desire to find compensation for the aridness of his profession and
of his life in the joys of poetry and music and to restore to his body
the natural power and beauty stolen from it by the study's atmosphere?
Do we not recall with envy the energy of a Demosthenes who, despite his
stammering, became a great orator? If our patient thus fulfilled the
obvious gaps in his physical and mental life by delusional wishes, the
supposition is warranted that the whispered love-song which he sang from
time to time filled up a painful blank in his being, which became more
painful the more it was concealed. The explanation is not far to seek.
It is simply the old story, born anew in every human soul, in a guise
befitting the destined creature's highest sensibilities.

When our patient was a student he learnt to know and love a
girl-student. Together they made many excursions in the environs of
the town, but his exceeding timidity and bashfulness (the lot of the
stammerer) never permitted him an opportunity of getting out the
appropriate words. Moreover, he was poor and had nothing to offer her
but hopes. The time came for the termination of his studies; she went
away, and he also, and they never saw one another again. And not long
afterwards he heard she had married some one else. Then he relinquished
his hopes, but he did not know that Eros never emancipates his slaves.

He buried himself in abstract learning, not to forget, but to work for
her in his thoughts. He wanted to keep the love in his heart quite
secret, and never to betray that secret. He would dedicate his works to
her without her ever knowing it. The compromise succeeded, but not for
long. Once he travelled through the town where he heard she lived--it
seems to have been an accident that he travelled through that town.
He did not leave the train, which only made a short halt there. From
the window he saw standing in the distance a young woman with a little
child, and thought it was she. Impossible to say whether it was really
so or not. He does not think he felt any peculiar feeling at that
moment; anyway he gave himself no trouble to ascertain whether it was
she, which makes the presumption strong that it was not really she.
The unconscious wanted to be left in peace with its illusion. Shortly
afterwards he again came to B----, the place of old memories. Then he
felt something strange stir in his soul, an uneasy feeling, akin to
Nietzsche's--

    "Not for long shalt thou thirst, O burning heart!
    There is promise in the air,
    Winds come to me from unknown mouths--
    The healing coolness comes."

Civilised man no longer believes in demons, he calls in the doctor. Our
patient wanted to be hypnotised. Then madness overcame him. What was
going on in him?

He answered this question in broken sentences, with long pauses, in that
twilight-stage that heralds convalescence. I give as faithfully as may
be his own words. When he fell ill he suddenly lost the well-regulated
world and found himself in the chaos of an overmastering dream, a sea of
blood and fire; the world was out of joint; everywhere conflagration,
volcanic outbreaks, earthquakes, mountains fell in, followed by enormous
battles where the peoples fell upon one another; he became involved more
and more in the battle of nature, he was right in the midst of those
fighting, wrestling, defending himself, enduring unutterable misery and
pain; gradually he was exalted and strengthened by a strange calming
feeling that some one was watching his struggles, that his loved one saw
all from afar. That was the time when he showed real violence to the
attendants. He felt his strength increasing and saw himself at the head
of great armies which he would lead to victory. Then more great battles
and at length victory. He would try to get his loved one as prize of
victory. As he drew near her the illness ceased, and he awoke from a
long dream.

His daily life again began to follow the regular routine. He shut
himself up in his work and forgot the abyss within himself. A few years
later he is again at B---- Demon or Destiny? Again he followed the
old trail and again was overborne by old memories. But this time he
was not immersed in the depths of confusion. He remained orientated
and _en rapport_ with his surroundings. The struggle was considerably
milder, but he did gymnastics, practised the arts, and made good his
deficiencies; then followed the dreamy stage with the love-songs,
corresponding to the period of victory in the first psychosis. In this
state, according to his own words, he had a dreamlike feeling as if he
stood upon the borders of two worlds and knew not whether truth stood on
the right or on the left. He told me, "It is said she is married, but I
believe she is not, but is still waiting for me; I feel that it must be
so. It is ever to me as if she were not married, and as if success were
yet attainable."

Our patient here portrayed but a pale copy of the scene in the first
attack of psychosis, when he, the victor, stood before his mistress.
In the course of a few weeks after this conversation the scientific
interests of the patient again began to predominate. He spoke with
obvious unwillingness about his intimate life, he repressed it more
and more, and finally turned away from it as if it did not belong to
himself. Thus gradually the gate of the under-world became closed.
There remained nothing but a certain tense expression, and a look
which, though fixed on the outer world, was turned inwards at the same
time; and this alone hinted at the silent activity of the unconscious,
preparing new solutions for his insoluble problem. This is the so-called
cure in dementia præcox.

Hitherto we psychiatrists used not to be able to suppress a laugh when
we read an artist's attempts to portray a psychosis. These attempts have
been generally regarded as quite useless, for the writer introduces
into his conception of the psychosis psychological relationships quite
foreign to the clinical picture of the disease. But the artist has not
simply proceeded to copy a case out of a psychiatric text-book; he knows
as a rule better than the psychiatrist.

The case which I have sketched is not unique, it is typical of a whole
class for which the artist Spitteler has created a model of universal
validity; the model is _Imago_. I may take for granted that you know his
book of that name. The psychological gulf, however, between the creation
of the artist and the insane person is great. The world of the artist
is one of solved problems; the world of reality, that of unsolved
problems. The mental patient is a faithful image of this reality. His
solutions are unsatisfying illusions, his cure a temporary giving up of
the problem, which yet goes on working in the depths of the unconscious,
and at the appointed time again rises to the surface and creates new
illusions with new scenery; part of the history of mankind is here seen
abridged.

Psychological analysis is far from being able to explain in complete and
illuminating fashion all cases of the disease with which we are here
concerned. On the contrary, the majority remain obscure and difficult to
understand, and chiefly because only a certain proportion of patients
recover. Our last patient is noteworthy because his return to a normal
state afforded us a survey of the period of his illness. Unfortunately
the advantage of this standpoint is not always possible to us, for a
great number of persons never find their way back from their dreams.
They are lost in the maze of a magic garden where the same old story
is repeated again and again in a timeless present. For patients the
hands of the clock of the world remain stationary; there is no time, no
further development. It makes no difference to them whether they dream
for two days or thirty years. I had a patient in my ward who was five
years without uttering a word, in bed, and entirely buried in himself.
For years I visited him twice daily, and as I reached his bedside I
could see at once that there was no change. One day I was just about to
leave the room when a voice I did not recognise called out--"Who are
you? What do you want here?" I saw with astonishment that it was the
dumb patient who had suddenly regained his voice, and obviously his
senses also. I told him I was his doctor, whereupon he asked angrily,
why was he kept a prisoner here, and why did no one ever speak to him?
He said this in an injured voice just like a normal person whom one had
neglected for a couple of days. I informed him that he had been in bed
quite speechless for five years and had responded to nothing, whereat
he looked at me fixedly and without understanding. Naturally I tried
to discover what had gone on in him during these five years, but could
learn nothing. Another patient with a similar symptom, when asked why
he had remained silent for years, maintained, "Because I wanted to
spare the German language."[199] These examples show that it is often
impossible to lift the veil of the secret, for the patients themselves
have neither interest nor pleasure in explaining their strange
experiences, in which as a rule they realise nothing peculiar.

Occasionally the symptoms themselves are a sign-post to the
understanding of the psychology of the disease.

We had a patient who was for thirty-five years an inmate at Burghölzli.
For decades she lay in bed, she never spoke or reacted to anything, her
head was always bowed, her back bent and the knees somewhat drawn up.
She was always making peculiar rubbing movements with her hands, so as
to give rise during the course of years to thick horny patches on her
hands. She kept the thumb and index finger of her right hand together
as in the movement of sewing. When she died I tried to discover what
she had been formerly. Nobody in the asylum recalled ever having seen
her out of bed. Only our chief attendant had a memory of having seen
her sitting in the same attitude as that she afterwards took up in bed,
at which time she was making rapid movements of extension of the arm
across the right knee; it was said of her that she was sewing shoes,
later that she was polishing shoes. As time went on the movements became
more limited till finally there remained but a slight rubbing movement,
and only the finger and thumb retained the sewing position. In vain
I consulted our old attendant, she knew nothing about the patient's
previous history. When the seventy-year-old brother came to the funeral
I asked him what had been the cause of his sister's illness; he told
me that she had had a love-affair, but for various reasons it had
come to nothing. The girl had taken this so to heart that she became
low-spirited. In answer to a query about her lover it was found that he
was a _shoemaker_.

Unless you see here some strange play of accident, you must agree that
the patient had kept the memory-picture of her lover unaltered in her
heart for thirty-five years.

One might easily think that these patients who give an impression of
imbecility are only burnt-out ruins of humanity. But such is probably
not the case. One can often prove directly that such patients register
everything going on around them even with a certain curiosity, and have
an excellent memory for it all. This is the reason why many patients
become for a time pretty sensible again, and develop mental powers which
one believed they had long since lost. Such intervals occur occasionally
during serious physical disease, or just before death. We had a patient
with whom it was impossible to carry on a sane conversation; he only
produced a mad medley of delusions and words. He once fell seriously
ill physically, and I expected it would be very difficult to treat him.
Not at all. He was quite changed, he became friendly and amiable, and
carried out all his doctor's orders patiently and gratefully. His eyes
lost their evil darting looks, and shone quietly and understandingly.
One morning I came to his room with the usual greeting: "Good morning.
How are you getting on?" The patient answered me in the well-known way:
"There again comes one of the dog and monkey troupe wanting to play the
Saviour." Then I knew his physical trouble was over. From that moment
the whole of his reason was as if "blown away" again.

From these observations we see that reason still survives, but is pushed
away into some corner by the complete preoccupation of the mind with
diseased thoughts.

Why is the mind compelled to exhaust itself in the elaboration of
diseased nonsense? On this difficult question our new insight throws
considerable light. To-day we can say that the pathological images
dominate the interests of the patient so completely, because they are
simply derivatives of the most important questions that used to occupy
the person when normal--what in insanity is now an incomprehensible
maze of symptoms used to be fields of vital interest to the former
personality.

I will cite as an example a patient who was twenty years in the asylum.
She was always a puzzle to the physicians, for the absurdity of her
delusions exceeded anything that the boldest imagination could create.

She was a dressmaker by trade, born in 1845, of very poor family.
Her sister early went wrong and was finally lost in the swamp of
prostitution. The patient herself led an industrious, respectable,
reserved life. She fell ill in 1886 in her 39th year--at the threshold
of the age when so many a dream is brought to naught. Her illness
consisted in delusions and hallucinations which increased rapidly,
and soon became so absurd that no one could understand her wishes and
complaints. In 1887 she came to the asylum. In 1888 her statements,
so far as the delusions were concerned, were not intelligible. She
maintained such monstrous things as that: "At night her spinal marrow
had been torn out; pains in the back had been caused by substances that
went through the walls and were covered with magnetism." "The monopoly
fixed the sorrows which are not in the body and do not fly about in the
air." "Excursions are made by breathing in chemistry, and by suffocation
regions are destroyed."

In 1892 the patient styled herself the "Bank Note Monopoly, Queen of the
Orphans, Proprietress of the Burghölzli Asylum;" she said: "Naples and I
must provide the world with macaroni" (Nudel).

In 1896 she became "Germania and Helvetia from exclusively pure butter";
she also said, "I am Noah's Ark, the boat of salvation and respect."

Since then the disease has greatly increased; her last creation is the
delusion that she is the "lily red sea monster and the blue one."

These instances will show you how far the incomprehensibility of such
pathological formations go. Our patient was for years the classic
example of meaningless delusional ideas in dementia præcox; and many
hundreds of medical students have received from the demonstration of
this case a permanent impression of the sinister power of insanity. But
even this case has not withstood the newer technique of psychoanalysis.
What the patient says is not at all meaningless; it is full of
significance, so that he who has the key can understand without overmuch
difficulty.

Time does not allow me to describe the technique by means of which I
succeeded in lifting the veil of her secret. I must content myself by
giving a few examples to make the strange changes of thought and of
speech in this patient clear to you.

She said of herself that _she was Socrates_. The analysis of this
delusion presented the following ideas: Socrates was the wisest man,
the man of greatest learning; he was infamously accused, and had to die
in prison at the hands of strange men. She was the best dressmaker, but
"never unnecessarily cut a thread, and never allowed a piece of material
to lie about on the floor." She worked ceaselessly, and now she has been
falsely accused, wicked men have shut her up, and she will have to die
in the asylum.

Therefore she is Socrates; this is, as you see, simple metaphor, based
upon obvious analogy. Take another example: "_I am the finest professor
and the finest artist in the world._"

The analysis furnishes the remarks that she is the best dressmaker and
chooses the most beautiful models which show up well and waste little
material; she puts on the trimming only where it can be seen. She is a
professor, and an artist in her work. She makes the best clothes and
calls them absurdly "The Schnecke Museum-clothes." Her customers are
only such persons as frequent the Schnecke House and the Museum (the
Schnecke House is the aristocratic club. It is near the Museum and the
Library, another rendezvous of the aristocratic set of Zürich), for she
is the best dressmaker and makes only Schnecke Museum[200] clothing.

The patient also _calls herself Mary Stuart_. Analysis showed the same
analogy as with Socrates: innocent suffering and death of a heroine.

"_I am the Lorelei._" Analysis: This is an old and well-known song: "I
know not what it means," etc. Whenever she wants to speak about her
affairs people do not understand her, and say they don't know what it
means; hence she is the Lorelei.

"_I am Switzerland._" Analysis: Switzerland is free, no one can rob
Switzerland of her freedom. The patient does not belong to the asylum,
she would be free like Switzerland, hence she is Switzerland.

"_I am a crane._" Analysis: In the "Cranes of Ibykus" it is said:
"Whosoever is free of sin and fault shall preserve the pure soul of
a child." She has been brought innocent to the asylum and has never
committed a crime--hence she is a crane.

"_I am Schiller's Bell._" Analysis: Schiller's Bell is the greatest work
of the great master. She is the best and most industrious dressmaker,
and has achieved the highest rung in the art of dressmaking--hence she
is Schiller's Bell.

"_I am Hufeland._" Analysis: Hufeland was the best doctor. She suffers
intolerably in the asylum and is moreover treated by the worst doctors.
She is, however, so prominent a personality that she had a claim to the
best doctors, that is to a doctor like Hufeland--hence she is Hufeland.

The patient used the expression "I am" in a very arbitrary way.
Sometimes it meant "it belongs to me" or "it is proper for me";
sometimes it means "I should have." This is seen from the following
analysis:

"_I am the master-key._" Analysis: The master-key is the key that opens
all the doors of the asylum. Properly, according to all rights, the
patient should long since have obtained this key for she has been for
many years "the proprietress of the Burghölzli Asylum." She expresses
this reflection very much simplified in the sentence, "I am the
master-key."

The chief content of her delusions is concentrated in the following
words:--

"_I am the monopoly._" Analysis: The patient means the banknote
monopoly, which has belonged to her for some time. She believes that
she possesses the monopoly of the entire bank notes of the world, thus
creating enormous riches for herself, in compensation for the poverty
and lowliness of her lot. Her parents died early; hence she is the
Queen of the Orphans. Her parents lived and died in great poverty. Her
blessings are extended to them also, the dreamlike delusions of the
patient benefit them in many ways. She says textually: "My parents are
clothed by me, my sorely-tried mother, full of sorrow--I sat with her at
table--covered in white with superfluity."

This is another of these malleable hallucinations which the patient had
daily. It is one of those scenes of wish-fulfilment, with poverty on
one side and riches on the other, recalling Hauptmann's Hannele; more
especially that scene where Gottwald says: "She was clothed in rags--now
she is bedeckt in silken robes; and she ran about barefoot--now she has
shoes of glass to her feet. Soon she will live in a golden castle and
eat each day of baked meats. Here has she lived on cold potatoes...."

The wish-fulfilments of our patient go even further. Switzerland has
to furnish her with an income of 150,000 francs. The Director of the
Burghölzli owes her 80,000 francs damages for wrongful incarceration.
She is the proprietress of a distant island with silver mines, the
"mightiest silver island in the world." Therefore she is also the
greatest orator, possesses the most wonderful eloquence, for, as she
says, "Speech is _silver_, silence gold." To her all the beautiful
landed estates belong--all the rich quarters, towns and lands, she
is the proprietress of a world, even a "threefold proprietress of
the world." Whilst poor Hannele was only elevated to the side of the
Heavenly Bridegroom, our patient has the "Key of Heaven," she is not
only the honoured earthly queens Mary Stuart and Queen Louise of
Prussia, but she is also the Queen of Heaven, the Mother of God as well
as the Godhead. Even in this earthly world where she was but a poor,
ill-regarded homely dressmaker she attained fulfilments of her human
wishes, for she had taken three husbands from the best families in
the town and her fourth was the Emperor Francis. From these marriages
there were two phantom children--a little boy and a little girl. Just
as she clothed, fed and feasted her parents, so she provided for the
future of her children. To her son she bequeathed the great bazaar of
Zürich, therefore her son is a "Zur," for the proprietor of a _Bazaar_
is a "Zur." The daughter resembles her mother; hence she becomes the
proprietress of the asylum and takes her mother's place so that the
mother is released from captivity. The daughter therefore receives the
title of "Agency of Socrates," for she replaces Socrates in captivity.

These instances by no means exhaust the delusional fancies of the
patient. But they will give you some idea, I hope, of the richness
of her inner life although she was apparently so dull and apathetic,
or, as was said _imbecile_, and sat for twenty years in her workroom,
where she mechanically repaired her linen, occasionally uttering a
complex of meaningless fragments which no one had hitherto been able to
understand. Her odd lack of words can now be seen in another light; they
are fragments of enigmatical inscriptions, of fairy-story phantasies,
which have escaped from the hard world to found a world of their own.
Here the tables are ever laden, and a thousand feasts are celebrated in
golden palaces. The patient can only spare a few mysterious symbols for
the gloomy dim shores of reality; they need not be understood, for our
understanding has not been necessary for her for this long time.

Nor is this patient at all unique. She is one of a type. Similar
phantasies are always found in patients of this kind, though not always
in such profusion.

The parallels with Hauptmann's Hannele show that here likewise the
artist has shown us the way with the free creation of his own phantasy.
From this coincidence, which is not accidental, we may conclude that
there is something common both to the artist and the insane and not to
them alone. Every human being has also within himself that restless
creative phantasy which is ever engaged in assuaging the harshness
of reality. Whoever gives himself unsparingly and carefully to
self-observation, will realise that there dwells within him something
which would gladly hide and cover up all that is difficult and
questionable in life, and thus procure an easy and free path. Insanity
grants the upper hand to this something. When once it is uppermost,
reality is more or less quickly driven out. It becomes a distant dream,
and the dream which enchains the patient wholly or in part, and often
for life, has now the attributes of reality. We normal persons, who have
to do entirely with reality, see only the products of disordered fancy,
but not the wealth of that side of the mind which is turned away from
us. Unfortunately only too often no further knowledge reaches us of the
things which are transpiring on that other side, because all the bridges
are broken down which unite this side with that.

We do not know to-day whether these new views are of universal or only
of limited validity; the more carefully and perseveringly we examine our
patients, the more we shall meet cases, which, despite apparent total
imbecility, will yet afford us at least some fragmentary insight into
the obscurities of the psychical life. This life is far removed from
that mental poverty which the prevailing theories were compelled to
accept.

However far we are from being able to understand fully the
concatenations of that obscure world, at least we may maintain, with
complete assurance, that in dementia præcox there is no symptom which
can be described as psychologically baseless and meaningless. The
most absurd things are in reality symbols of ideas which are not
only generally understandable, but also universally operative in the
human heart. In insanity we do not discover anything new and unknown,
but we look at the foundation of our own being, the source of those
life-problems in which we are all engaged.


PART II.[201]

The number of psychoanalytic investigations into the psychology of
dementia præcox has considerably increased since the publication of my
book upon the subject.[202] When, in 1903, I made the first analysis
of a case of dementia præcox, there dawned on me a premonition of the
possibilities of future discoveries in this sphere. This has been
confirmed.

Freud first submitted a case of paranoid dementia to closer
psychological investigation.[203] This he was enabled to do by means
of an analytic technique perfected through his rich experiences with
neurotics. He selected the famous autobiography of P. Schreber,
"Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken." The patient could not be
analysed personally, but having published his most interesting
autobiography all the material wanted for an analysis was to be found in
it.

In this study Freud shows out of what infantile forms of thought and
instincts the delusional system was built up. The peculiar delusions
which the patient had about his doctor whom he identified with God
or with a god-like being, and certain other surprising and really
blasphemous ideas, Freud was able to reduce most ingeniously to his
infantile relationship to his father. This case also presented similar
bizarre and grotesque concatenations of ideas to the one I have
described. As the author himself says, his work confines itself to the
task of pointing out those universally existent and undifferentiated
foundations out of which we may say every psychological formation is
historically developed.[204] This reductive analytical process did not,
however, furnish such enlightening results in regard to the rich and
surprising symbolism in patients of this kind as we had been accustomed
to expect from the same method in the realm of the psychology of
hysteria. In reading certain works of the Zürich school, for example,
Maeder,[205] Spielrein,[206] Nelken,[207] Grebelskaja,[208] Itten,[209]
one is powerfully impressed by the enormous symbol-formation in dementia
præcox.

Some of the authors still proceed essentially by the method of analytic
reduction, tracing back the complicated delusional formation into its
simpler and more universal components, as I have done in the preceding
pages. One cannot, however, resist the feeling that this method hardly
does justice to the fulness and the almost overpowering wealth of
phantastic symbol-formation, although it does undoubtedly throw a light
upon the subject in certain directions.

Let me illustrate with an example. We should be thankful for a
commentary upon "Faust" which traced back all the diverse material of
Part II. to its historical sources, or for a psychological analysis
of Part I. which pointed out how the dramatic conflict corresponds to
a personal conflict in the soul of the poet; we should be glad of an
exposition which pointed out how this subjective conflict is itself
based upon those ultimate and universal human things which are nowise
foreign to us since we all carry the seeds of them in our hearts.
Nevertheless we should be a little disappointed. We do not read "Faust"
just in order to discover that also we are, in all things, "human, all
too human." Alas, we know that but too well already. Let any one who
has not yet learnt it go for a little while out into the world and look
at it without preconceptions and with open eyes. He will turn back from
the might and power of the "too human," hungrily he will pick up his
"Faust," not to find again what he has just left, but to learn how a man
like Goethe shakes off these elemental human things and finds freedom
for his soul. When we once know who was the "Proktophantasmist," to what
chronological events the mass of symbols in Part II. relates, how it is
all intimately bound up with the poet's own soul and conditioned by it,
we come to regard this determination as less important than the problem
itself--what does the poet mean by his symbolic creation? Proceeding
purely reductively, one discovers the final meaning in these universal
human things; and demands nothing further from an explanation than that
the unknown and complicated shall be reduced to the known and simple. I
should like to designate this kind of understanding as _retrospective
understanding_. But there is another kind of understanding, which is not
analytic reduction, but is of a _synthetic_ or _constructive_ nature. I
would designate this _prospective understanding_, and the corresponding
method as the _Constructive method_.

It is common knowledge that present-day scientific explanation rests
upon the basis of the causal principle. Scientific explanation is
causal explanation. We are therefore naturally inclined, whenever we
think scientifically, to explain causally, to understand a thing and
to regard it as explained whenever it is reduced analytically to its
cause and general principle. In so far Freud's psychological method of
interpretation is strictly scientific.

If we apply this method to "Faust" it must become clear that something
more is required for a true understanding. It will even seem to us
that we have not gathered the poet's deepest meaning if we only see in
it universal foregone human conclusions. What we really want to find
out is how this man has redeemed himself as an individual, and when we
arrive at this comprehension then we shall also understand the symbol
given by Goethe. It is true we may then fall into the error that we
understand Goethe himself. But let us be cautious and modest, simply
saying we have thereby arrived at an understanding of ourselves. I am
thinking here of Kant's thought-compelling definition of comprehension,
as "the realisation of a thing to the extent which is sufficient for our
purpose."

This understanding is, it is true, subjective, and therefore not
scientific for those to whom science and explanation by the causal
principle are identical. But the validity of this identification is open
to question. In the sphere of psychology I must emphasise my doubt on
this point.

We speak of "objective" understanding when we have given a causal
explanation. But at bottom, understanding is a subjective process upon
which we confer the quality "objective" really only to differentiate it
from another kind of understanding which is also a psychological and
subjective process, but upon which, without further ado, we bestow the
quality "subjective." The attitude of to-day only grants scientific
value to "objective" understanding on account of its universal
validity. This standpoint is incontestably correct wherever it is not a
question of the psychological process itself, and hence it is valid in
all sciences apart from pure psychology.

To interpret Faust objectively, _i.e._ from the causal standpoint, is as
though a man were to consider a sculpture from the historical, technical
and--last but not least--from the mineralogical standpoint. But where
lurks the _real meaning_ of the wondrous work? Where is the answer to
that most important question: what aim had the artist in mind, and how
are we ourselves to understand his work subjectively? To the scientific
spirit this seems an idle question which anyhow has nothing to do with
science. It comes furthermore into collision with the causal principle,
for it is a purely speculative constructive view. And the modern world
has overthrown this spirit of scholasticism.

But if we would approach to an understanding of psychological things we
must remember the fact of the subjective conditioning of all knowledge.
The world is _as we see it_ and not simply objective; this holds true
even more of the mind. Of course it is possible to look at the mind
objectively, just as at Faust, or a Gothic Cathedral. In this objective
conception there is comprised the whole worth and worthlessness of
current experimental psychology and psychoanalysis. The scientific mind,
thinking causally, is incapable of understanding what is ahead; it only
understands what is past, that is, retrospective. Like Ahriman, the
Persian devil, it has the gift of After-Knowledge. But this spirit is
only one half of a complete comprehension. The other more important half
is prospective or constructive; if we are not able to understand what
lies ahead, then nothing is understood. If psychoanalysis, following
Freud's orientation, should succeed in presenting an uninterrupted and
conclusive connection between Goethe's infantile sexual development and
his work, or, following Adler, between the infantile struggle for power
and the adult Goethe and his work, an interesting proposition would have
been solved--we should have learnt how a masterpiece can be reduced to
the simplest thinkable elements, which are universal, and to be found
working within the depths of everything and everybody. But did Goethe
construct his work to _this_ end? Was it his intention that it should be
thus conceived?

It must be sufficiently clear that such an understanding, though
undoubtedly scientific, would be entirely, utterly, beside the mark.
This statement is valid for psychology in general. To understand
the psyche causally, means to understand but half of it. The causal
understanding of Faust enlightens us as to how it became a finished work
of art, but reveals nothing of the living meaning of the poet. That
meaning only lives if we experience it, in and through ourselves. In so
far as our actual present life is for us something essentially new and
not a repetition of all that has gone before, the great value of such
a work is to be seen, not in its causal development, but in its living
reality for our own lives. We should be indeed depreciating a work like
Faust if we were only to regard it as something that has been perfected
and finished; it is only understood when conceived as a becoming and as
an ever new-experiencing.

Thus we must regard the human psyche. Only on one side is the mind a
Has Been, and as such subordinate to the causal principle. On the other
side the mind is a Becoming that can only be grasped synthetically or
constructively. The causal standpoint asks how it is this actual mind
has become what it appears to-day? The constructive standpoint asks how
a bridge can be built from this actual psyche to its own future?

Just as the causal method finally reaches the general principles of
human psychology by the analysis and reduction of individual events,
so does the constructive standpoint reach aims that are general by the
synthesis of individual tendencies. The mind is a point of passage and
thus necessarily determined from two sides. On the one side it offers a
picture of the precipitate of the past, and on the other side a picture
of the germinating knowledge of all that is to come, in so far as the
psyche creates its own future.

What has been is, on the one hand, the result and apex of all that
was--as such it appears to the causal standpoint; on the other hand, it
is an expression of all that is to be. The future is only _apparently_
like the past, but in its essence always new and unique, (the causal
standpoint would like to invert this sentence) thus the actual formula
is incomplete, germlike so to say, in relation to what is to be.

To get any conception of this expression of what is to be we are forced
to apply a constructive interest to it. I almost felt myself tempted
to say, "a scientific interest." But modern science is identical with
the causal principle. So long as we consider the actual mind causally,
that is scientifically, we elude the mind as a Becoming. This other side
of the psyche can never be grasped by the exclusive use of the causal
principle, but only by means of the constructive standpoint. The causal
standpoint reduces things to their elements, the constructive standpoint
elaborates them into something higher and more complicated. This latter
standpoint is necessarily a speculative one.

Constructive understanding is, however, differentiated from scholastic
speculation because it imposes no general validity, but only subjective
validity. When the speculative philosopher believes he has comprehended
the world once for all by his System, he deceives himself; he has only
comprehended himself and then naïvely projected that view upon the
world. In reaction against this, the scientific method of the modern
world has almost put an end to speculation and gone to the other
extreme. It would create an "objective" psychology. In opposition
to such efforts, the stress which Freud has placed upon individual
psychology is of immortal merit. The extraordinary importance of the
subjective in the development of the objective mental process was thus
first brought adequately into prominence.

Subjective speculation lays no claim to universal validity, it is
identical with constructive understanding. It is a subjective creation,
which, looked at externally, easily seems to be a so-called infantile
phantasy, or at least an unmistakable derivative of it; from an
objective standpoint it must be judged as such, in so far as objective
is regarded as identical with scientific or causal. Looked at from
within, however, constructive understanding means redemption.

"Creation--that is the great redemption from suffering and easiness of
living."[210]

       *       *       *       *       *

Starting from these considerations as to the psychology of those
mental patients to whom the Schreber case belongs, we must, from the
"objective-scientific" standpoint, reduce the structural phantasy of the
patient to its simple and most generally valid elements. This Freud had
done. But that is only half of the work to be done. The other half is
the constructive understanding of Schreber's system. The question is:
What end, what freedom, did the patient hope to achieve by the creation
of his system?

The scientific thinker of to-day will regard this question as
inappropriate. The psychiatrist will certainly smile at it, for he is
thoroughly assured of the universal validity of his causalism, he knows
the psyche merely as something that is made, descendent, reactive. Not
uncommonly there lurks the unconscious prejudice that the psyche is a
brain-secretion.

Looking at such a morbid system without preconception, and asking
ourselves what goal this delusional system is aiming at, we see, in
fact, firstly, that it _is_ endeavouring to get at something, and
secondly, that the patient also devotes all his will-power to the
service of the system. There are patients who develop their delusions
with scientific thoroughness, often dragging in an immense material of
comparison and proof. Schreber certainly belongs to this class. Others
do not proceed so thoroughly and learnedly, but content themselves with
heaping up synonymous expressions for that at which they are aiming. The
case of the patient I have described, who assumes all kinds of titles,
is a good instance of this.

The patient's unmistakable striving to express something through and
by means of his delusion Freud conceives retrospectively, as the
satisfaction of his infantile wishes by means of imagination. Adler
reduces it to the desire for power.

For him the delusion-formation is a "manly protest," a means of
gaining security for himself against his menaced superiority. Thus
characterised, this struggle is likewise infantile and the means
employed--the delusional creation--is infantile because insufficient
for its purpose; one can therefore understand why Freud declines to
accept Adler's point of view. Freud, rightly on the whole, subsumes this
infantile struggle for power under the concept of the infantile wish.

The constructive standpoint is different. Here the delusional system
is neither infantile nor, upon the whole, _eo ipso_ pathological but
_subjective_, and hence justified within the scope of the subjective.
The constructive standpoint absolutely denies the conception that the
subjective phantasy-creation is merely an infantile wish, symbolically
veiled; or that it is merely that in a higher degree; it denies that
it is a convulsive and egoistic adhesion to the fiction of its own
superiority, in so far as these are to be regarded as finalistic
explanations. The subjective activity of the mind can be judged from
without, just as one can, in the end, so judge everything. But this
judgment is inadequate, because it is the very essence of the subjective
that it cannot be judged objectively. We cannot measure distance in
pints. The subjective can be only understood and judged subjectively,
that is, constructively. Any other judgment is unfair and does not meet
the question.

The absolute credit which the constructive standpoint confers upon the
subjective, naturally seems to the "scientific" spirit as an utter
violation of reason. But this scientific spirit can only take up arms
against it so long as the constructive is not avowedly _subjective_. The
constructive comprehension also _analyses_, but it does not _reduce_.
It decomposes the delusion into _typical_ components. What is to be
regarded as the type at a given time is shown from the attainment of
experience and knowledge reached at that time.

Even the most individual delusional systems are not absolutely unique,
occurring only once, for they offer striking and obvious analogies
with other systems. From the comparative analysis of many systems
the typical formations are drawn. If one can speak of reduction at
all, it is only a question of reduction to general type, but not to
some universal principle obtained inductively or deductively, such
as "Sexuality" or "Struggle for Power." This paralleling with other
typical formations only serves for a widening of the basis upon which
the construction is to be built. If one were to proceed entirely
subjectively one would go on constructing in the language of the patient
and in his mental range. One would arrive at some structure which was
illuminating to the patient and to the investigator of the case but not
to the outer scientific public. The public would be unable to enter into
the peculiarities of the speech and thought of the individual case in
question without further help.

The works of the Zürich school referred to contain careful and detailed
expositions of individual material. In these materials there are
very many typical formations which are unmistakably _analogies_ with
_mythological formations_[211]. There arose from the perception of
this relationship a new and valuable source for comparative study.
The acceptance of the possibility of such a comparison will not be
granted immediately, but the question is only whether the materials
to be compared really are similar or not. It will also be contended
that pathological and mythological formations are not immediately
comparable. But this objection must not be raised _a priori_, for only
a conscientious comparison can determine whether any true parallelism
exists or not. At the present moment all we know is that they are both
structures of the imagination which, like all such products, rest
essentially upon the activity of the unconscious. Experience must teach
us whether such a comparison is valid. The results hitherto obtained
are so encouraging that further work along these lines seems to me most
hopeful and important. I made practical use of the constructive method
in a case which Flournoy published in the _Archives de Psychologie_,
although he offered no opinion as to its nature at that time.

The case dealt with a rather neurotic young lady who, in Flournoy's
publication, described how surprised she was at the connected
phantasy-formations which penetrated from the unconscious into the
conscious. I subjected these phantasies, which the lady herself
reproduced in some detail, to my constructive methods and gave the
results of these investigations in my book, "The Psychology of the
Unconscious."

This book has, I regret to say, met with many perhaps inevitable
misunderstandings. But I have had one precious consolation, for my book
received the approval of Flournoy himself, who published the original
case which he knew personally. It is to be hoped that later works will
make the standpoint of the Zürich school intelligible to a wider public.
Whoever, by the help of this work, has taken the trouble to grasp the
essence of the constructive method, will readily imagine how great are
the difficulties of investigation, and how much greater still are the
difficulties of objective presentation of such investigations.

Among the many difficulties and opportunities for misunderstanding I
should like to adduce one difficulty which is especially characteristic.
In an intensive study of Schreber's or any similar case, it will be
discovered that these patients are consumed by the desire for a new
world-philosophy which may be of the most bizarre kind. Their aim is
obviously to create a system such as will help them in the assimilation
of unknown psychical phenomena, _i.e._ enable them to adapt their
own unconscious to the world. This arrangement produces a subjective
system which must be considered as a necessary transition-stage on the
path to the adaptation of their personality in regard to the world in
general. But the patient remains stationary at this transitory stage
and assumes his subjective view is the world's, hence he remains ill.
He cannot free himself from his subjectivism and does not find the link
to objective thinking, _i.e._ to society. He does not reach the real
summit of self-understanding, for he remains with a merely subjective
understanding of himself. But a _mere_ subjective understanding is not
real and adequate. As Feuerbach says: _Understanding is only real
when it is in accord with that of some other rational beings_. Then it
becomes objective[212] and the link with life is reached.

I am convinced that not a few will raise the objection that in the first
place the psychological process of adaptation does not proceed by the
method of first creating a world-philosophy; secondly, that it is in
itself a sign of unhealthy mental disposition even to make the attempt
to adapt oneself by way of a "world-philosophy."

Undoubtedly there are innumerable persons who are capable of adaptation
without creating any preliminary philosophy. If they ever arrive at any
general theory of the world it is always subsequently. But, on the other
hand, there are just as many who are only able to adapt themselves by
means of a preliminary intellectual formulation. To everything which
they do not understand they are unable to adapt themselves. Generally
it comes about that they do adapt themselves just in so far as they can
grasp the situation intellectually. To this latter group seem to belong
all those patients to whom we have been giving our consideration.

Medical experience has taught us that there are two large groups of
functional nervous disorders. The one embraces all those forms of
disease which are designated _hysterical_, the other all those forms
which the French school has designated _psychasthenic_. Although
the line of demarcation is rather uncertain, one can mark off two
psychological types which are obviously different; their psychology
is diametrically opposed. I have called these--the _Introverted_ and
_Extroverted_ types. The hysteric belongs to the type of _Extroversion_,
the psychasthenic to the type of _Introversion_, as does dementia
præcox, in so far as we know it to-day. This terminology, _Introversion_
and _Extroversion_, is bound up with my way of regarding mental
phenomena as forms of energy. I postulate a hypothetical fundamental
striving which I designate _libido_.[213] In the classical use of the
word, _libido_ never had an exclusively sexual connotation as it has in
medicine. The word _interest_, as Claparède once suggested to me, could
be used in this special sense, if this expression had to-day a less
extensive application. Bergson's concept, _élan vital_, would also serve
if this expression were less biological and more psychological. Libido
is intended to be an energising expression for _psychological values_.
The psychological value is something active and determining; hence it
can be regarded from the energic standpoint without any pretence of
exact measurement.

The introverted type is characterised by the fact that his libido
is turned towards his own personality to a certain extent--he finds
within himself the unconditioned value. The extroverted type has his
libido to a certain extent externally; he finds the unconditioned value
outside himself. The introvert regards everything from the aspect of
his own personality; the extrovert is dependent upon the value of his
object. I must emphasise the statement that this question of types is
_the_ question of our psychology, and that every further advance must
probably proceed by way of this question. The difference between these
types is almost alarming in extent. So far there is only one small
preliminary communication by myself[214] on this theory of type, which
is particularly important for the conception of dementia præcox. On the
psychiatric side Gross[215] has called attention to the existence of two
psychological types. His two types are (1) those with limited but deep
consciousness, and (2) those with broad but superficial consciousness.
The former correspond to my introverted and the latter to my extroverted
type. In my article I have collected some other instances among which
I would especially call attention to the striking description of the
two types given by William James in his book on "Pragmatism." Fr. Th.
Vischer has differentiated the two types very wittily by her division of
the learned into "reason-mongers," and "matter-mongers." In the sphere
of psychoanalysis Freud follows the psychology of Extraversion, Adler
that of Introversion. The irreconcilable opposition between the views
of Freud and those of Adler (see especially his book "Über den nervösen
Charakter") is readily explained by the existence of two diametrically
opposed psychological types which view the same things from entirely
different aspects. An Extrovert can hardly, or only with great
difficulty, come to any understanding with an Introvert, on any delicate
psychological question.

An Extrovert can hardly conceive the necessity which compels the
Introvert to conquer the world by means of a system. And yet this
necessity exists, otherwise we should have no philosophical systems
and dogmas, presumed to be universally valid. Civilised humanity
would be only empiricists and the sciences only the experimental
sciences. Causalism and empiricism are undoubtedly mighty forces in our
present-day mental life but it may come to be otherwise.

This difference in type is the first great obstacle which stands in
the way of an understanding concerning fundamental conceptions of our
psychology. A second objection arises from the circumstance that the
constructive method, faithful to itself, must adapt itself to the
lines of the delusion. The direction along which the patient develops
his morbid thoughts has to be accepted seriously, and followed out
to its end; the investigator thus places himself at the standpoint
of the psychosis. This procedure may expose him to the suspicion
of being deranged himself; or at least risks a misunderstanding
which is considered terribly disgraceful--he may himself have some
world-philosophy! The confirmation of such a possibility is as bad
as being "unscientific." But every one has a world-philosophy though
not every one knows he has. And those who do not know it have simply
an unconscious and therefore inadequate and archaic philosophy. But
everything psychological that is allowed to remain in the mind neglected
and not developed, remains in a primitive state. A striking instance of
how universal theories are influenced by unconscious archaic points of
view has been furnished by a famous German historian whose name matters
to us not at all. This historian took it for granted that once upon
a time people propagated themselves through incest, for in the first
human families the brother was assigned to the sister. This theory is
wholly based upon his still unconscious belief in Adam and Eve as the
first and only parents of mankind. It is on the whole better to discover
for oneself a modern world-philosophy, or at least to make use of some
decent system which will prevent any errors of that kind.

One could put up with being despised as the possessor of a
world-philosophy; but there is a greater danger. The public may come to
believe the philosophy, beaten out by the constructive method, is to be
regarded as a theoretical and objectively valid insight into the meaning
of the world in general.

I must now again point out that it is an obstinate, scholastic
misunderstanding not to be able to distinguish between a
world-philosophy which is only psychological, and an extra-psychological
theory, which concerns the objective thing. It is absolutely essential
that the student of the results of the constructive method should be
able to draw this distinction. In its first results the constructive
method does not produce anything that could be called a scientific
theory; it furnishes the _psychological lines of development_, a _path_
so to say. I must here refer the reader to my book, "Psychology of the
Unconscious."

The analytic reductive method has the advantage of being much simpler
than the constructive method. The former reduces to well-known universal
elements of an extremely simple nature. The latter has, with extremely
complicated material, to construct the further path to some often
unknown end. This obliges the psychologist to take full account of
all those forces which are at work in the human mind. The reductive
method strives to replace the religious and philosophical needs of man,
by their more elementary components, following the principle of the
"nothing but," as James so aptly calls it. But to _construct_ aright,
we must accept the developed aspirations as indispensable components,
essential elements, of spiritual growth. Such work extends far beyond
empirical concepts but that is in accordance with the nature of the
human soul which has never hitherto rested content with experience
alone. Everything new in the human mind proceeds from speculation.
Mental development proceeds by way of speculation, never by way of
limitation to mere experience. I realise that my views are parallel
with those of Bergson, and that in my book the concept of the libido
which I have given, is a concept parallel to that of "élan vital"; my
constructive method corresponds to Bergson's "intuitive method." I,
however, confine myself to the psychological side and to practical work.
When I first read Bergson a year and a half ago I discovered to my great
pleasure everything which I had worked out practically, but expressed by
him in consummate language and in a wonderfully clear philosophic style.

Working speculatively with psychological material there is a risk of
being sacrificed to the general misunderstanding which bestows the
value of an objective theory upon the line of psychological evolution
thus elaborated. So many people feel themselves in this way at pains
to find grounds whether such a theory is correct or not. Those who are
particularly brilliant even discover that the fundamental concepts can
be traced back to Heraclitus or some one even earlier. Let me confide
to these knowing folk that the fundamental ideas employed in the
constructive method stretch back even beyond any historical philosophy,
viz. to the dynamic "views" of primitive peoples. If the result of the
constructive method were scientific theory, it would go very ill with
it, for then it would be a falling back to the deepest superstition.
But since the constructive method results in something far removed from
scientific theory the great antiquity of the basic concepts therein must
speak in favour of its extreme correctness. Not until the constructive
method has presented us with much practical experience can we come to
the construction of a _scientific theory, a theory of the psychological
lines of development_. But we must first of all content ourselves with
confirming these lines individually.


FOREWORD TO CHAPTER XIV

This essay was originally written in 1913, when I limited myself
entirely to presenting an essential part of the psychological point
of view inaugurated by _Freud_. A few months ago my Swiss publisher
asked for a second and revised edition. The many and great changes
which the last few years have brought about in our understanding of the
psychology of the unconscious necessitated a substantial enlargement
of my essay. In this new edition some expositions about _Freud's_
theories are shortened, whilst _Adler's_ psychological views are more
fully considered, and--so far as the scope of this paper permits--a
general outline of my own views are given. I must at the outset draw
the reader's attention to the fact that this is no longer an easy
"popular" scientific paper, but a presentation making great demands upon
the patience and attention of the reader. The material is extremely
complicated and difficult. I do not for a moment deceive myself into
thinking this contribution is in any way conclusive or adequately
convincing. Only detailed scientific treatises about the various
problems touched upon in these pages could really do justice to the
subject. Any one who wishes to go deeply into the questions that are
raised here must be referred to the special literature of the subject.
My attention is solely to give the orientation in regard to the newest
concepts of the inner nature of unconscious psychology. I consider the
subject of the unconscious to be specially important and opportune at
this moment. In my opinion, it would be a great loss if this problem,
concerning every one so closely as it does, were to disappear from
the horizon of the educated lay public, by being interned in some
inaccessible specialised scientific journal. The psychological events
that accompany the present war--the incredible brutalisation of public
opinion, the epidemic of mutual calumnies, the unsuspected mania for
destruction, the unexampled flood of mendacity, and man's incapacity
to arrest the bloody demon--are they not, one and all, better adapted
than anything else, to force obtrusively the problem of the chaotic
unconscious--which slumbers uneasily beneath the ordered world of
consciousness,--before the eyes of every thinking individual? This
war has inexorably shown to the man of culture that he is still a
barbarian. It testifies also what an iron scourge awaits him, if ever
again it should occur to him to make his neighbour responsible for his
own bad qualities. The psychology of the individual corresponds to the
psychology of nations. What nations do, each individual does also,
and as long as the individual does it, the nation will do it too. A
metamorphosis in the attitude of the individual is the only possible
beginning of a transformation in the psychology of the nation. The
great problems of humanity have never been solved by universal laws,
but always and only by a remodelling of the attitude of the individual.
If ever there was a time when self-examination was the absolutely
indispensable and the only right thing, it is now, in the present
catastrophic epoch. But he who bethinks himself about his own being
strikes against the confines of the unconscious, which indeed contains
precisely that which it is most needful for him to know.

    C. G. JUNG.

    KÜSNACHT-ZÜRICH,
    _March, 1917_.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 194: First Edition, 1908 = Part I. (unaltered); Second
Edition, 1914 = Part II. Translator, M. D. Eder.]

[Footnote 195: "The Psychology of Dementia Præcox," translated by Brill
and Peterson, _Monograph Series of the Journal of Nervous and Mental
Diseases_, New York.]

[Footnote 196: Bresler, "Kulturhistorischer Beitrag zur Hysterie."
_Allg. Zeitschrift für Psychiatrie_, Bd. LIII., p. 333. Zündel,
"Biographie Blumhardts."]

[Footnote 197: Central Asylum and University Psychiatric Clinic in
Zürich.]

[Footnote 198: In psychiatry "inadequate" is employed to denote
disproportion between feeling and idea whether in excess or the reverse.]

[Footnote 199: I am indebted for this example to my colleague Dr.
Abraham of Berlin.]

[Footnote 200: As one might say in England, "a Bond Street dressmaker."]

[Footnote 201: This is an addition to the second edition, 1914.]

[Footnote 202: "The Psychology of Dementia Præcox."]

[Footnote 203: _Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische Forschung_, vol. III. pp.
9 and 558.]

[Footnote 204: Comp. also Ferenczi: "Über die Rolle der Homosexualität
in der Pathogenese der Paranoia," _Jahrb._, III., p. 101.]

[Footnote 205: Maeder: "Psychologische Untersuchungen an Dementia præcox
Kranken," _Jahrbuch f. psychoanalyt. Forsch._, II., p. 185.]

[Footnote 206: Spielrein: "Über den psychologischen Inhalt eines Falles
von Schizophrene," _l.c._, III., p. 329 ff.]

[Footnote 207: Nelken: "Analytische Beobachtungen über Phantasien eines
Schizophrenen," _l.c._, IV., p. 505 ff.]

[Footnote 208: Grebelskaja: "Psychologische Analyse eines Paranoiden,"
_l.c._, IV., p. 116 ff.]

[Footnote 209: Itten: "Beiträge zur Psychologie der Dementia præcox,"
_l.c._, p. V., 1 ff.]

[Footnote 210: Nietzsche, "Thus spake Zarathustra."]

[Footnote 211: "Quelques faits d'imagination créatrice subconsciente,"
Miss Miller, vol. V., p. 36.]

[Footnote 212: Here "objective" understanding is not identical with
causal understanding.]

[Footnote 213: This energy may also be designated as hormé. Hormé is a
Greek word [Greek: hormê]--force, attack, press, impetuosity, violence,
urgency, zeal. It is related to Bergson's "élan vital." The concept
hormé is an energic expression for psychological values.]

[Footnote 214: See p. 287.]

[Footnote 215: "Die zerebrale Sekundärfunktion." Leipzig, 1902.]




CHAPTER XIV

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS PROCESSES[216]

_Being a Survey of the Modern Theory and Method of Analytical Psychology_


I.--THE BEGINNINGS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS

In common with other sciences, psychology had to go through its
scholastic-philosophic stage, and to some extent this has lasted on
into the present time. This philosophic psychology has incurred our
condemnation in that it decides _ex cathedra_ what is the nature of the
soul, and whence and how it derives its attributes. The spirit of modern
scientific investigation has summarily disposed of all these phantasies
and in their place has established an exact empiric method. We owe to
this our present-day experimental psychology or "_psychophysiology_,"
as the French call it. This new direction originated with Fechner,
that Janus-minded spirit, who in his remarkable _Psychophysik_ (1860)
embarked on the mighty enterprise of introducing the physical standpoint
into the conception of psychical phenomena. The whole idea of this
work--and not least its astonishing mistakes--proved most fruitful in
results. For Wundt, Fechner's young contemporary, carried on his work,
and it is Wundt's great erudition, enormous power of work and genius for
elaborating methods of experimental research, which have given to modern
psychology its prevailing direction.

Until quite recently experimental psychology remained essentially
academic. The first notable attempt to utilise some few at any rate
of its innumerable experimental methods in the service of practical
psychology came from the psychiatrists of the former Heidelberg school
(Kræpelin, Aschaffenburg, etc.); it is quite intelligible that the
psychotherapists should be the first to feel the urgent need for more
exact knowledge of psychic processes.

Next came pedagogy, making its own demands upon psychology. Out of this
has recently grown up an "experimental pedagogy," and in this field
Neumann in Germany and Binet in France have rendered signal services.
The physician, the so-called "nerve-specialist," has the most urgent
need of psychological knowledge if he would really help his patients,
for neurotic disturbances, such as hysteria, and all things classed as
"nervousness," are of psychic origin, and necessarily demand psychic
treatment. Cold water, light, air, electricity, magnetism, etc., are
only effective temporarily, and quite often are of no use at all. They
are frequently introduced into treatment in a not very commendable
fashion, simply because reliance is placed upon their suggestive effect.
But it is in his soul that the patient is really sick; in those most
complicated and lofty functions which we scarcely dare to include in
the province of medicine. The doctor must needs, in such a case, be a
psychologist, must needs understand the human soul. He cannot evade the
urgent demand upon him. So he naturally turns for help to psychology,
since his psychiatry text-books have nothing to offer him. But modern
experimental psychology is very far from being able to afford him any
connected insight into the most vital psychic processes, that is not
its aim. As far as possible it tries to isolate those simple elementary
phenomena which border on the physiological, and then study them in an
isolated state. It quite ignores the infinite variation and movement of
the mental life of the individual, and accordingly, its knowledge and
its facts are so many isolated details, uninspired by any comprehensive
idea capable of bringing them into co-ordination. Hence it comes about
that the inquirer after the secrets of the human soul, learns rather
less than nothing from experimental psychology. He would be better
advised to abandon exact science, take off his scholar's gown, say
farewell to his study, and then, strong in manly courage, set out to
wander through the world; alike through the horrors of prisons, lunatic
asylums and hospitals, through dreary outlying taverns, through
brothels and gambling-halls, into elegant drawing-rooms, the Stock
Exchanges, socialist meetings, churches, revival gatherings of strange
religious sects, experiencing in his own person love and hate and every
kind of suffering. He would return laden with richer knowledge than his
yard-long text-books could ever have given him, and thus equipped, he
can indeed be a physician to his patients, for he understands the soul
of man. He may be pardoned if his respect for the "corner-stones" of
experimental psychology is no longer very considerable. There is a great
gulf fixed between what science calls "psychology," on the one hand, and
what the practice of everyday life expects from psychology on the other.

This need became the starting-point of a new psychology whose inception
we owe first and foremost to the genius of Sigmund Freud, of Vienna,
to his researches into functional nervous disease. The new type of
psychology might be described as "analytical psychology." Professor
Bleuler has coined the name "Deep Psychology,"[217] to indicate that
the Freudian psychology takes as its province the deeper regions, the
"hinterland" of the soul, the "unconscious." Freud names his method of
investigation "psychoanalysis."

Before we approach the matter more closely, we must first consider the
relationship of the new psychology to the earlier science. Here we
encounter a singular little farce which once again proves the truth of
Anatole France's apothegm: "Les savants ne sont pas curieux."

The first important piece of work[218] in this new field awakened
only the faintest echo, in spite of the fact that it offered a new
and fundamental conception of the neuroses. Certain writers expressed
their approbation, and then, on the next page, proceeded to explain
their cases of hysteria in the good old way. It was much as if a man
should subscribe fully to the idea of the earth's being spherical, and
yet continue to represent it as flat. Freud's next publications[219]
were practically unnoticed, although they contributed findings of
immeasurable importance to the domain of psychiatry. When in 1900 he
produced the first real psychological elucidation of the dream[220]
(previously there had reigned over this territory a suitable nocturnal
darkness), he was ridiculed; and when in the middle of the last decade
he began to illumine the psychology of sexuality itself,[221] and at
the same time the "Zürich school" decided to range itself on his side,
a storm of abuse, sometimes of the coarsest kind, burst upon him, nor
has it yet ceased to rage. At the last South-West German Congress of
alienists in Baden-Baden, the adherents of the new psychology had
the pleasure of hearing Hoche, University Professor of Psychiatry at
Freiburg in Breisgau, describe the movement in a long and much-applauded
address, as an outbreak of mental aberration _among doctors_. The old
proverb: "Medicus medicum non decimat" was here quite put to shame. How
carefully the question had been studied was shewn by the naïve remark
of one of the most distinguished neurologists of Paris, which I myself
heard at the International Congress in 1907: "It is true I have not
read Freud's works (he did not happen to know any German!), but as for
his theories, they are nothing but a "mauvaise plaisanterie." Freud,
dignified, masterly, once said to me, I first became clearly conscious
of the value of my discoveries when they were met everywhere with
resistance and anger; since that time I have judged the value of my work
according to the degree of opposition provoked. It is against my sexual
theory that the greatest indignation is felt, so it would seem therein
lies my best work. Perhaps after all the real benefactors of mankind
are its false teachers, for opposition to the false doctrine pushes men
willy nilly into truth. Your truth-teller is a pernicious fellow, he
drives men into error."

The reader must now calmly accept the idea that in this psychology
he is dealing with something quite unique, if not indeed with some
altogether irrational, sectarian, or occult wisdom; for what else could
possibly provoke all the scientific authorities to turn away on the very
threshold and utterly refuse to cross it?

Accordingly, we must look more closely into this psychology. As long
ago as Charcot's time it was recognised that neurotic symptoms are
"psychogenic," that is, that they have their origin in the psyche.
It was also known, thanks mainly to the work of the Nancy School,
that every hysterical symptom can be exactly reproduced by means of
suggestion. But _how_ a hysterical system arises, and its relationship
to psychic causes, were altogether unknown. In the beginning of the
eighties Dr. Breuer, an old Viennese doctor, made a discovery[222]
which was really the true starting-point of the new psychology.
He had a very intelligent young patient (a woman) suffering from
hysteria, who exhibited the following symptoms among others: A spastic
paralysis of the right arm, occasional disturbances of consciousness
or twilight-states, and loss of the power of speech in so far as she
no longer retained any knowledge of her mother-tongue, and could only
express herself in English (so-called systematic aphasia). They sought
at that time, and still seek, in such a case to establish some theory of
anatomical disturbance, although there was just as little disturbance
in the arm-centre in the brain as in that of any normal man who boxes
another's ears. The symptomatology of hysteria is full of anatomical
impossibilities; such as the case of the lady who had lost her hearing
completely through some hysterical malady. None the less she often used
to sing, and once when she was singing her doctor sat down at the piano
unnoticed by her and softly accompanied her. Passing from one strophe
to another he suddenly altered the key, and she, quite unconscious of
what she was doing, sang on in the altered key. Thus she heard--yet did
not hear. The various forms of systematic blindness present similar
phenomena. We have the case of a man suffering from complete hysterical
blindness. In the course of the treatment he recovers his sight, but at
first, and for some long time, only partially: he could see everything
with one exception--people's heads. He saw all the people around him
without heads. Thus he saw--yet did not see. From a large number of like
experiences it has long been concluded that it is only the patient's
consciousness which does not see, does not hear, but the sense-function
has nothing at all the matter with it. This state of affairs is directly
contradictory to the essence of an organic disturbance, which always
materially involves the function.

After this digression let us return to Breuer's case. Since there was no
organic cause for the disturbance, the case was clearly to be regarded
as hysterical, that is, psychogenic. Dr. Breuer had noticed that if
during her twilight-states (whether spontaneous or artificially induced)
he let the patient freely express the reminiscences and phantasies that
thronged in upon her, her condition was afterwards much improved for
some hours. He made systematic use of this observation in her further
treatment. The patient herself invented the appropriate name for it of
"talking cure" or, in jest, "chimney sweeping."

Her illness began whilst she was nursing her dying father. It is
easy to understand that her phantasies busied themselves mainly with
this disturbing time. In the twilight-states memories of this period
reappeared with photographic fidelity, distinct in every detail: no
waking recollection is ever so plastically and exactly reproduced.
The term hypermnesia is applied to this heightening of the power of
memory, which occurs without difficulty in certain states of contracted
consciousness. Remarkable things now came to light. Out of the many
things told, one ran somewhat as follows.[223]

On a certain night she was in a state of great anxiety about her
father's high temperature. She sat by his bed, waiting for the surgeon
who was coming from Vienna to perform an operation. Her mother had gone
out of the room for a little while, and Anna (the patient) sat by the
bed, with her right arm hanging over the back of her chair. She fell
into a kind of waking-dream in which she saw a black snake come out
from the wall and approach the sick man, prepared to bite. (It is very
probable that some real snakes had been seen in the fields behind the
house, and that she had been frightened by them; this would furnish the
material for her hallucination.) She wanted to drive the creature away,
but felt paralysed; her right arm, hanging over the chair, had "gone to
sleep," was anæsthetic and paretic, and as she looked her fingers turned
into little snakes with death's heads (the nails). Probably she tried
to drive the snake away with her paralysed right hand, and thereby the
anæsthesia and paralysis became associated with the snake-hallucination.
Even after the snake had disappeared, her terror remained great. She
tried to pray, but found she had no words in any language, until at
length she managed to remember some English nursery rhymes, and then she
could go on thinking and praying in that language.

This was the actual scene in which the paralysis and speech-disturbance
arose; the describing it served to remove the speech-trouble, and in
this same fashion the case was finally completely cured.

I must restrict myself to this one instance. In Breuer and Freud's book
there is a wealth of similar examples. It is easy to understand that
scenes such as these make a very strong impression, and accordingly
there is an inclination to attribute a causal significance to them in
the genesis of the symptoms. The then current conception of hysteria,
arising from the English "nervous shock" theory, which Charcot strongly
supported, came in conveniently to elucidate Breuer's discovery,
hence arose the _trauma-theory_ maintaining that the hysterical
symptom and in so far as the symptoms comprise the disease, hysteria
itself, arises from some _psychic injury_ (or _trauma_), the effect
of which is retained in the unconscious indefinitely. Freud, working
as Breuer's colleague, amply confirmed this discovery. It was fully
demonstrated that not one out of the many hundred hysterical symptoms
came down ready made from heaven; they had already been conditioned
by past psychic experiences. To some extent, therefore, this new
conception opened up a field of very important empirical work. But
Freud's tireless spirit of inquiry could not long rest content at
this superficial layer, since already there obtruded deeper and more
difficult problems. It is obvious enough that moments of great fear
and anxiety, such as Breuer's patient went through, would leave behind
a lasting effect, but how is it that these happenings are themselves
already deeply stamped with the mark of morbidity? Must we suppose
that the trying sick-nursing in itself produce such a result? If
so, such effects should occur much more frequently, for there are,
unfortunately, many trying cases of sick-nursing, and the nurse's
nervous constitution is by no means always of the soundest. To this
problem medicine gives its admirable answer; the "x" in the calculation
is _predisposition_; there is a tendency to these things. But for Freud
the problem was, what exactly constitutes this predisposition? This
question led logically to an investigation of all that had preceded the
psychic trauma. It is a matter of common observation that distressing
scenes have markedly different effects upon the different participants,
and that things which to some are quite indifferent or even pleasant,
such as frogs, mice, snakes, cats, excite the greatest aversion in
others. There are the cases of women who can calmly be present at a
very bad operation, but who tremble all over with horror and nausea
at the touch of a cat. By way of illustration let me give the case
of a young lady suffering from severe hysteria following a sudden
fright.[224] She had been at a social gathering, and was on her way
home at midnight accompanied by several acquaintances, when a carriage
came up behind them at full speed. All the others moved out of the way,
but she, beside herself with fright, ran down the middle of the road
just in front of the horses. The coachman cracked his whip and cursed
and swore in vain. She ran down the whole length of the street till
a bridge was reached. There her strength failed her, and to escape
the horses' feet in her despair she would have jumped into the water
had not passers-by prevented her. This same lady happened to be in
Petrograd during that sanguinary Revolution of the 22nd of January, and
saw a street cleared by the volleys of soldiers. All around her people
were dropping down dead or wounded, but she retained her calmness and
self-possession, and caught sight of a door which gave her escape into
another street. These terrible moments agitated her neither at the time
nor later on. She was quite well afterwards, indeed felt better than
usual.

Essentially similar reactions can quite often be observed. Hence
it follows that the intensity of the trauma is of small pathogenic
importance; the peculiar circumstances determine its pathogenic effect.
Here, then, we have the key which enables us to unlock at least one of
the anterooms to an understanding of predisposition. We must now ask
what were the unusual circumstances in this carriage scene? The terror
and apprehension began as soon as the lady heard the trampling horses.
For a moment she thought this portended some terrible fate, her death,
or something equally frightful; the next, she lost all sense of what she
was doing.

This powerful impression was evidently connected in some way with
the horses. The predisposition of the patient to react in such an
exaggerated fashion to a not very remarkable incident, might result
from the fact that horses had some special significance for her. It
might be suspected that she had experienced some dangerous accident
with them; this actually turned out to be the case. When a child of
about seven years old she was out for a drive with the coachman; the
horses shied and galloped at full speed towards a steep river-bank.
The coachman jumped down, and shouted to her to do the same, but in
her extreme terror she could scarcely bring herself to obey. She did,
however, just manage to jump out in the nick of time, whilst the horses
and carriage were dashed to pieces below. No proof is needed that such
an experience must leave a lasting impression behind it. But it does not
offer any explanation for such an exaggerated reaction to an inadequate
stimulus. So far we only know that this later symptom had its prologue
in childhood, but its pathological aspect remains obscure. To penetrate
into the heart of such a mystery it was necessary to accumulate further
material. And the greater our experience the clearer does it become
that in all cases with such traumatic experiences analysed up to the
present, there co-exists a special kind of disturbance which can only be
described as a derangement in the sphere of _love_. Not all of us give
due credit to the anomalous nature of love, reaching high as heaven,
sinking low as hell, uniting in itself all extremes of good and evil, of
lofty and low.[225]

As soon as Freud recognised this, a decisive change came about in his
view. In his earlier researches, whilst more or less dominated by
Charcot's trauma-theory, he had sought for the origin of the neurosis
in actual traumatic experiences; but now the centre of gravity shifted
to a very different point. This is best demonstrated by reference to
our case; we can understand that horses might easily play a significant
part in the patient's life, but it is not clear why there should be this
later reaction, so exaggerated, so uncalled for. It is not her fear of
horses which forms the morbid factor in this curious story; to get at
the real truth we must remember our empirical conclusion, that, side by
side with traumatic experiences, there is also invariably present some
disturbance in the sphere of love. We must now go on to inquire whether
perhaps there is anything unsatisfactory in this respect in the case
under review.

Our patient has a young man friend, to whom she is thinking of becoming
engaged, she loves him and expects to be happy with him. At first
nothing more is discoverable; but the investigator must not let himself
be deterred by a negative result in the beginning of this preliminary
questioning. When the direct way does not lead to the desired end, an
indirect way may be taken. We accordingly turn our attention back to
that strange moment when she ran away in front of the horses. We inquire
who were her companions and what kind of social gathering was it, and
find it was a farewell-party to her best friend, on her departure to a
foreign health-resort on account of a nervous breakdown. We are told
this friend is happily married and is the mother of one child. We may
well doubt the assertion that she is happy. If she really were so, it
is hardly to be supposed she would be "nervous" and in need of a cure.
When I attacked the situation from a different vantage-ground, I learnt
that our patient--after this episode--had been taken by her friends to
the nearest safe place--her host's house. In her exhausted state he
took charge of her. When the patient came to this part of her story,
she suddenly broke off, was embarrassed, fidgeted and tried to turn
the subject. Evidently some disagreeable reminiscences had suddenly
cropped up. After obstinate resistances had been overcome, she admitted
something very strange had happened that night. Her host had made her
a passionate declaration of love, thus occasioning a situation that,
in the absence of his wife, might well be considered both painful and
difficult. Ostensibly this declaration came upon her like a "bolt from
the blue." But a small dose of criticism applied to such an assertion
soon apprises us that these things never do drop suddenly from the sky;
they always have their previous history. It was a task of the following
weeks to dig out piecemeal a long love-story. I will attempt to sketch
in the picture as it appeared finally.

As a child the patient was a thorough tomboy, loved boys' boisterous
games, laughed at her own sex, and would have nothing to do with
feminine ways or occupations. After puberty, just when the sex-issue
should have meant much to her, she began to shun all society; she
seemingly hated and despised everything which could remind her even
remotely of the biological destiny of mankind, and lived in a world of
phantasy which had nothing in common with rude reality. Thus, till her
twenty-fourth year, she escaped all the little adventures, hopes and
expectations which ordinarily move a girl at this age. But finally she
got to know the two men who were destined to destroy the thorny hedge
which had grown up around her. Mr. A. was her best friend's husband;
Mr. B. was their bachelor-friend. She liked both; but pretty soon found
B. the more sympathetic, and an intimacy grew up between them which made
an engagement seem likely. Through her friendship with him and with
Mrs. A., she often met Mr. A. His presence excited her inexplicably,
made her nervous. Just at this time she went to a big party. All her
friends were there. She became lost in thought, and in a reverie was
playing with her ring, when suddenly it slipped out of her hand and
rolled under the table. Both men tried to find it and Mr. B. managed to
get it. With a meaning smile he put the ring back on her finger, and
said, "You know what that means!" Overcome by some strange, irresistible
feeling, she tore the ring from her finger and flung it out of the open
window. Naturally a painful moment for all ensued, and she soon went
away, much depressed. A little while after, so-called chance brought her
for her summer holidays to the health-resort where A. and his wife were
staying. It was then that Mrs. A. began to suffer from nerve-trouble,
and frequently felt too unwell to leave the house. So our patient could
often go out for walks alone with A. One day they were out in a small
boat. She was boisterously merry and fell overboard. Mr. A. saved her
with difficulty as she could not swim, and he managed to lift her into
the boat in a half-unconscious state. Then he kissed her. This romantic
event wove fast the bonds between them. In self-defence she did her best
to get herself engaged to B. and to persuade herself that she loved him.
Of course this queer comedy could not escape the sharp eye of feminine
jealousy. Mrs. A., her friend, guessed the secret, and was so much upset
by it that her nervous condition grew bad enough to necessitate her
trying a cure at a foreign health-resort. At the farewell gathering the
demon came to our patient and whispered: "To-night he will be alone,
something must happen to you so that you can go to his house." And so
indeed it came about; her strange behaviour made her friends take her to
his house, and thus she achieved her desire.

After this explanation the reader will probably be inclined to assume
that only diabolical subtlety could think out and set in motion such a
chain of circumstances. There is no doubt about the subtlety, but the
moral evaluation is less certain. I desire to lay special emphasis upon
the fact that the patient was _in no sense conscious of the motives_ of
this dramatic performance. The incident apparently just came about of
itself without any conscious motive whatsoever. But the whole previous
history makes it perfectly clear that everything was most ingeniously
directed towards the other aim; whilst the conscious self was apparently
working to bring about the engagement to Mr. B., the unconscious
compulsion to take the other road was still stronger.

So once more we must return to our original question, whence comes the
pathological, the peculiar and exaggerated reaction to the trauma?
Relying on a conclusion obtained from other analogous experiences,
we ventured the conjecture that in the present case we had to do
with a disturbance in the love-life, in addition to the trauma. This
supposition was thoroughly borne out; the trauma, which was apparently
the cause of the illness, was merely the _occasion_ for some factor,
till then unconscious, to manifest itself. This was the _significant
erotic conflict_. With this finding the trauma loses its pathogenic
significance and is replaced by a much deeper and more comprehensive
conception, which regards the erotic conflict as the pathogenic agent.
This conception may be described as the sexual theory of the neurosis.

I am often asked why it is just the erotic conflict rather than any
other which is the cause of the neurosis. There is but one answer to
this. No one asserts that this ought necessarily to be the case, but as
a simple matter of fact it is always found to be so, notwithstanding all
the cousins and aunts, godparents, and teachers, who rage against it.
Despite all the indignant assertions to the contrary, the problem and
conflicts of love are of fundamental importance for humanity,[226] and
with increasingly careful study, it comes out ever more clearly that
the love-life is of immensely greater importance than the individual
suspects.

As a consequence of the recognition that the true root of the neurosis
is not the trauma, but the hidden erotic conflict, the trauma loses its
pathogenic significance.


II.--THE SEXUAL THEORY.

Thus, it will be seen, the theory had to be shifted on to an entirely
different basis, for the investigation now had to face the erotic
conflict itself. Our example shows that this contains extremely abnormal
elements and cannot, _primâ facie_, be compared with an ordinary love
conflict. It is surprising, indeed hardly credible, that only the
postulated affection should be conscious, whilst the real passion
remained unknown to the patient. But in this case it is beyond dispute
that the real erotic relation remained unillumined, whilst the field of
consciousness was dominated by the assumption. If we try to formulate
this fact, something like the following proposition results: _in a
neurosis_, two erotic tendencies exist which stand in extreme opposition
to one another, and one at least is unconscious. Against this formula
the objection can be raised that it has obviously been derived from
this one particular case, and is therefore lacking in general validity.
The criticism will be the more readily urged because no one unpossessed
of special reasons is willing to admit that the erotic conflict is of
universal prevalence. On the contrary, it is assumed that this conflict
belongs more properly to the sphere of novels, since it is generally
depicted as something in the nature of such wild adventures as are
described by Karin Michaelis in her "Aberrations of Marriage," or by
Forel in "The Sexual Question." But indeed this is not the case; for we
know the wildest and most moving dramas are not played on the stage, but
every day in the hearts of ordinary men and women who pass by without
exciting attention, and who betray to the world, save through the symbol
of a nervous breakdown, nothing of the conflicts that rage within them.
But what is so difficult for the layman to grasp is the fact that in
most cases patients have no suspicion whatever of the internecine
war raging in their unconscious. But remembering that there are many
people who understand nothing at all about themselves, we shall be less
surprised at the realisation that there are also people who are utterly
unaware of their actual conflicts.

If the reader is now inclined to admit the possible existence of
pathogenic, and perhaps even of unconscious conflicts, he will certainly
protest that they are not erotic conflicts. If this kind reader should
happen himself to be somewhat nervous, the mere suggestion will arouse
his indignation, for we are all inclined, as a result of our education
in school and at home, to cross ourselves three times where we meet such
words as "erotic" and "sexual"--and so we are conveniently able to think
that nothing of that nature exists, or at least very seldom, and at a
great distance from ourselves. But it is just this attitude which in the
first instance brings about neurotic conflicts.

We recognise that the course of civilisation consists in the progressive
mastering of the animal element in man; it is a process of domestication
which cannot be carried through without rebellion on the part of the
animal nature still thirsting for its liberty. Humanity forces itself
to endure the restrictions of the civilising process; but from time
to time there comes a frenzied bursting of all bonds. Antiquity had
experience of it in that wave of Dionysian orgies, surging hither from
the East, which became an essentially characteristic element of antique
culture. Its spirit was partly instrumental in causing the numerous
sects and philosophic schools of the last century before Christ, to
develop the Stoic ideal into asceticism; and in producing from the
polytheistic chaos of those times, the ascetic twin-religions of Mithras
and of Christ. A second clearly marked wave of the Dionysian impulse
towards freedom swept over the Western world during the Renaissance.
It is difficult to judge of one's own time, but we gain some insight
if we note how the Arts are developing, what is the prevailing type of
public taste, what men read and write, what societies they found, what
"questions" are the order of the day, and against what the Philistines
are fighting. We find in the long list of our present social problems
that the sexual question occupies by no means the last place. It
agitates men and women who would shake the foundations of sexual
morality, and throw off the burden of moral shame which past centuries
have heaped upon Eros. The existence of these aspirations and endeavours
cannot be simply denied, or declared indefensible; they exist and
are therefore presumably not without justification. It is both more
interesting and more useful to study carefully the basic causes of these
movements than to chime in with the lamentations of the professional
mourners over morals, who prophesy with unction the moral downfall of
humanity. The moralist least of all trusts God, for he thinks that the
beautiful tree of humanity can only thrive by dint of being pruned,
bound, and trained on a trellis, whereas Father-Sun and Mother-Earth
have combined to make it grow joyfully in accordance with its own laws,
which are full of the deepest meaning.

Serious people are aware that a very real sexual problem does exist
at the present time. The rapid development of the towns, coupled with
methods of work brought about by the extraordinary division of labour,
the increasing industrialisation of the country and the growing security
of life, combine to deprive humanity of many opportunities of expending
emotional energy. Think of the life of the peasant, whose work so rich
and full of change, affords him unconscious satisfaction by means of its
symbolic content; a like satisfaction the factory-hand and the clerk
can never know. Think of a life with nature; of those wonderful moments
when, as lord and fructifier, man drives the plough through the earth,
and with kingly gesture scatters the seed of the future harvest; see his
justifiable awe before the destructive power of the elements, his joy in
the fruitfulness of his wife, who gives him daughters and sons, who mean
to him increased working power and enhanced prosperity. Alas! from all
this we town-dwellers, we modern machines, are far, far removed.

Must we not admit that we are already deprived of the most natural and
most beautiful of all satisfactions, since we can no longer contemplate
the arrival of our own seed, the "blessing" of children, with unmixed
pleasure? Marriages where no artifices are resorted to are rare.
Is this not an all-important departure from the joys which Mother
Nature gave her first-born sons? Can such a state of affairs bring
satisfaction? Note how men slink to their work, watch their faces at
an early morning hour in the tram-cars. One of them makes his little
wheels, and another writes trivial things which do not interest him.
What wonder is it if such men belong to as many clubs as there are days
in the week, and that among women little societies flourish, where they
pour out on some particular hero or cause those unsatisfied desires
which the man dulls at his restaurant or club, imbibing beer and playing
at being important? To these sources of dissatisfaction is added a more
serious factor. Nature has provided defenceless, weaponless man with a
great amount of energy to enable him not merely to bear passively the
grave dangers of existence, but also to conquer them. Mother Nature
has equipped her son for tremendous hardships and has placed a costly
premium on the overcoming of them, as Schopenhauer quite understood when
he said that "happiness is really but the termination of unhappiness."
Civilized people are, as a rule, shielded from the immediately pressing
dangers, and they are therefore daily tempted to excess, for in man
the animal always becomes rampant when he is not constrained by fierce
necessity. Are we then indeed unrestrained? In what orgiastic festivals
do _we_ dispose of the surplus of vital power? Our moral views do not
permit us that outlet.

But reckon up in how many directions we are met by unsatisfied
longings; the denial of procreation and begetting, for which purpose
nature has endowed us with great energy; the unending monotony of
our highly developed modern methods of "division of labour," which
excludes any interest in the work itself; and above all our effortless
security against war, lawlessness, robbery, epidemics, infant and
woman mortality--all this gives a sum of surplus energy which must
needs find an outlet. But how? A relatively few create quasi-natural
dangers for themselves in reckless sport; many more, seeking to find
some equivalent for their more primitive energy, take to alcoholic
excess; others expend themselves in the rush of money-making, or in the
morbid performance of duties, in perpetual over-work. By such means
they try to escape a dangerous storing-up of energy which might force
mad outlets for itself. It is for such reasons that we have to-day a
_sexual question_. It is in this direction that men's energy would like
to expend itself as it has done from time immemorial in periods of
security and abundance. Under such circumstances it is not only rabbits
that multiply; men and women, too, become the sport of these accesses
of nature: the sport, because their moral views have confined them in a
narrow cage, the excessive narrowness of which was not felt so long as
harsh external necessity pressed upon them with even greater constraint.
But now the man of the cities finds the space too circumscribed. He is
surrounded by alluring temptation, and like an invisible _procureur_
there slinks through society the knowledge of preventive methods which
evade all consequences. Why then moral restraint? Out of religious
consideration for an angry God? Apart from the prevalence of widespread
unbelief, even the believing man might quietly ask himself whether, if
he himself were God, he would punish the youthful erotic uncontrol of
John and Mary with twice twenty-four years of imprisonment and seething
in boiling oil. Such ideas are no longer compatible with our decorous
conception of God. The God of our time is necessarily much too tolerant
to make a great fuss over it; (knavishness and hypocrisy are a thousand
times worse). In this way the somewhat ascetic and hypocritical sexual
morality of our time has had the ground cut from under its feet.
Or is it the case that we are now protected from dissoluteness by
superior wisdom, recognition of the nothingness of human happenings?
Unfortunately we are very far from that; rather does the hypnotic power
of tradition keep us in bonds, and through cowardice and thoughtlessness
and habit the herd goes tramping on in this same path. But man possesses
in the unconscious a fine scent for the spirit of his time; he has an
inkling of his own possibilities and he feels in his innermost heart
the instability of the foundations of present-day morality, no longer
supported by living religious conviction. It is thus the greater number
of the erotic conflicts of our time originate. Instinct thirsting for
liberty thrusts itself up against the yielding barriers of morality: men
are tempted, they desire and do not desire. And because they will not
and cannot think out to its logical conclusion what it is they really
desire, their erotic conflict is largely unconscious; whence comes
neurosis. Neurosis then is most intimately bound up with the problem of
our times and represents an unsuccessful attempt of the individual to
solve the general problem in his own person. Neurosis is a tearing in
two of the _inner self_. For most men the reason of this cleavage is
the fact that their conscious self desires to hold to its moral ideal,
whilst the unconscious strives after the amoral ideal, steadfastly
rejected by the conscious self. People of this kind would like to appear
more decent than they really are. But the conflict is often of an
opposite kind. There are those who do not outwardly live a decent life
at all and do not place the slightest constraint upon their sexuality,
but in reality this is a sinful pose assumed for goodness knows what
reasons, for down below they have a decorous soul which has somehow gone
astray in their unconscious, just as has the real immoral nature in
the case of apparently moral people. Extremes of conduct always arouse
suspicions of the opposite tendencies in the unconscious.

It was necessary to make this general statement in order to elucidate
the idea of the "erotic conflict" in analytical psychology, for it is
the key to the conception of neurosis. We can now proceed to consider
the psychoanalytic technique. Obviously the main problem is, how to
arrive by the shortest and best path at a knowledge of the patient's
"unconscious." The method first used was hypnotism, the patient being
questioned, on the production of spontaneous phantasies observed while
in a state of hypnotic concentration. This method is still occasionally
used, but in comparison with the present technique is primitive and
frequently unsatisfactory. A second method, evolved by the Psychiatric
Clinic, Zürich, was the so-called association method,[227] which is
chiefly of theoretic, experimental value. Its result is an extensive,
though superficial orientation, concerning the unconscious conflict
("complex").[228] The more penetrating method is that of dream-analysis
whose discovery belongs to Sigmund Freud.[229]

Of the dream it can be said that "the stone which the builders rejected
has become the head of the corner." It is only in modern times that
the dream (that fleeting and seemingly insignificant product of the
soul), has met with such complete contempt. Formerly it was esteemed,
as a harbinger of fate, a warning or a consolation, a messenger of the
gods. Now we use it as a messenger of the unconscious; it must disclose
to us the secrets which our unconscious self enviously hides from our
consciousness, and it does so with astonishing completeness.

On analytical investigation it becomes plain that the dream, as we
remember it, is only a façade which conceals the contents within the
house. But if, observing certain technical rules, we get the dreamer
to talk about the details of his dream, it soon appears that his free
associations group themselves in certain directions and round certain
topics. These appear to be of personal significance, and have a meaning
which at first sight would not be suspected. Careful comparison
shows that they are in close and subtle symbolic connection with the
dream-façade.[230] This particular complex of ideas in which all the
threads of the dream unite, is the conflict for which we are seeking;
is its particular form at the moment, conditioned by the immediate
circumstances. What is painful and incompatible is in this way so
covered up or split that we can call it a wish-fulfilment; but we must
immediately add that the wishes fulfilled in the dream do not seem
at first sight to be _our_ wishes, but rather the very opposite. For
instance, a daughter loves her mother tenderly, but she dreams that
her mother is dead; this causes her great grief. Such dreams, where
apparently there is no trace of any wish-fulfilment are innumerable, and
are a constant stumbling-block to our learned critics, for--_incredible
dictu_--they still cannot grasp the simple distinction between the
_manifest_ and the _latent_ content of the dream. We must guard against
such an error; the conflict dealt with in the dream is an unconscious
one, and equally so also is the manner its solution. Our dreamer has,
as a matter of fact, the wish to get away from her mother--expressed
in the language of the unconscious, she wants her mother to die. Now
we know that a certain section of the unconscious contains all our
lost memories, and also all those infantile impulses that cannot find
any application in adult life--a series, that is, of ruthless childish
desires. We may say that for the most part the unconscious bears an
infantile stamp; like the child's simple wish: "Daddy, when Mummie is
dead, will you marry me?" In a dream that infantile expression of a
wish is the substitute for a recent wish to marry, which is painful to
the dreamer for reasons still undiscovered. This thought, or rather the
seriousness of its corresponding intention, is said to be "repressed
into the unconscious" and must there necessarily express itself in
an infantile way, for the material which is at the disposal of the
unconscious consists chiefly of infantile memories. As the latest
researches of the Zürich school have shown,[231] these are not only
infantile memories but also "racial" memories, extending far beyond the
limits of individual existence.

Important desires which have not been sufficiently gratified, or have
been "repressed," during the day find their symbolic substitution
in dreams. Because moral tendencies usually predominate in waking
hours, these ungratified desires which strive to realise themselves
symbolically in the dream are, as rule, erotic ones. It is, therefore,
somewhat rash to tell dreams before one who understands, for the
symbolism is often extremely transparent to him who knows the rules! The
clearest in this respect are "anxiety-dreams" which are so common, and
which invariably symbolise a strong erotic desire.

Often the dream apparently deals with quite irrelevant details, thereby
making a ridiculous impression; or else it is so unintelligible that we
are simply amazed at it, and accordingly have to overcome considerable
resistance in ourselves before we can set to work seriously to unravel
its symbolic weaving by patient work. But when at last we penetrate
into its real meaning we find ourselves at a bound in the very heart of
the dreamer's secrets, and find to our astonishment that an apparently
senseless dream is quite full of sense, and deals with extraordinarily
important and serious problems of the soul. Having acquired this
knowledge we cannot refrain from giving rather more credit to the
old superstitions concerning the meaning of dreams for which our
rationalising tendencies, until lately, had no use.

As Freud says: "Dream-analysis is the _via regia_ to the unconscious."
Dream-analysis leads us into the deepest personal secrets, and it is
therefore an invaluable instrument in the hand of the psychotherapist
and educator. The objections of the opponents of this method are based,
as might be expected, upon argument, which (setting aside undercurrents
of personal feeling) show the bias of present-day Scholasticism. It
so happens that it is just the analysis of dreams which mercilessly
uncovers the deceptive morals and hypocritical affectations of man, and
shows him the under side of his character; can we wonder if many feel
that their toes have been rather painfully trodden upon? In connection
with the dream-analysis I am always reminded of the striking statue of
Carnal Pleasure in Bâle Cathedral, which shows in front the sweet smile
of archaic sculpture, but behind is covered with toads and serpents.
Dream-analysis reverses the figure and for once shows the other side.
The ethical value of this reality-correction (Wirklichkeitscorrectur)
cannot be disputed. It is a painful but extremely useful operation,
which makes great demands on both physician and patient.

Psychoanalysis, in so far as we are considering it as a therapeutic
technique, consists mainly of the analysis of many dreams; the dreams
in the course of the treatment bringing up successively the contents of
the unconscious in order that they may be subjected to the disinfecting
power of daylight, and in this process many a valuable thing believed
to have been lost is found again. It is not surprising that for
those persons who have adopted a certain pose towards themselves,
psychoanalysis is at times a real torture, since in accordance with
the old mystic saying, "Give all thou hast, then only shalt thou
receive," there is first the necessity to get rid of almost all the
dearly cherished illusions, to permit the advent of something deeper,
finer, and greater, for only through the mystery of self-sacrifice is
it possible to be "born-again." It is indeed ancient wisdom which again
sees the daylight in psychoanalytic treatment, and it is a curious
thing that this kind of psychic re-education proves to be necessary at
the height of our modern culture; this education which in more than
one respect can be compared to the technique of Socrates, even though
psychoanalysis penetrates to much greater depths.

We always find in a patient some conflict, which at a particular
point, is connected with the great problems of society; so that when
the analysis has arrived at this point the apparently individual
conflict is revealed as a universal conflict of the environment and the
epoch. Neurosis is thus, strictly speaking, nothing but an individual
attempt, however unsuccessful, at a solution of the general problem;
it must be so, for a general problem, a "question," is not an end in
itself; it only exists in the hearts and heads of individual men and
women. The "question" which troubles the patient is--whether you like
it or not--the "sexual" question, or more precisely, the problem of
present-day _sexual morality_. His increased demands upon life and the
joy of life, upon glowing reality, can stand the necessary limitations
which _reality_ sets, but not the arbitrary, ill-supported prohibitions
of present-day morals, which would curb too much the creative spirit
rising up from the depths of the darkness of the beasts that perish.
For the _neurotic has in him the soul of a child_ that can but
ill-endure arbitrary limitations of which it does not see the meaning;
it tries to adopt the moral standard, but thereby only falls into
deeper disunion and distress within itself. On the one hand it tries to
suppress itself, and on the other to free itself--this is the struggle
that is called Neurosis. If this conflict were altogether clear to
consciousness it would of course never give rise to neurotic symptoms;
these only arise when we cannot see the other side of our character, and
the urgency of the problems of that other side. In these circumstances
symptoms arise which partially express what is unrecognised in the
soul. The symptom is, therefore, an indirect expression of unrecognised
desires, which, were they conscious, would be in violent opposition to
the sufferer's moral views. As we have already said, this dark side
of the soul does not come within the purview of consciousness, and
therefore the patient cannot deal with it, correct it, resign himself to
it, or renounce it, for he cannot be said to _possess_ the unconscious
impulses. By being repressed from the hierarchy of the conscious soul,
they have become _autonomous complexes_ which can be brought again
under control by analysis of the unconscious, though not without great
resistance. There are a great many patients whose great boast it is that
the erotic conflict does not exist for them; they are sure that the
sexual question is nonsense, that they have, so to say, no sexuality.
These people do not see that other things of unknown origin cumber their
path, such as hysterical whims, underhand tricks, from which they make
themselves, or those nearest them, suffer; nervous stomach-catarrh, pain
here and there, irritability without reason, and a whole host of nervous
symptoms. All which things show what is wrong with them, for relatively,
only a few specially favoured by fate, avoid the great conflict.

Analytical psychology has already been reproached with setting at
liberty the animal instincts of men, hitherto happily repressed, and
causing thereby untold harm. This childish apprehension clearly proves
how little trust is put in the efficacy of present-day moral principles.
It is pretended that only morals can restrain men from dissoluteness;
a much more efficient regulator, however, is _necessity_, which sets
much more real and convincing bounds than any moral principles. It is
true that analysis liberates animal instincts, but not, as some have
said, just in order to let them loose, but rather to make them available
for higher application, in so far as this is possible to the particular
individual, and in so far as such "sublimated" application is required.
Under all circumstances it is an advantage to be in full possession of
one's own personality, for otherwise the repressed desires will get in
the way in a most serious manner, and overthrow us just in that place
where we are most vulnerable. It is surely better that a man learn to
tolerate himself, and instead of making war on himself convert his inner
difficulties into real experiences, rather than uselessly repeat them
again and again in phantasy. Then at least he lives, and does not merely
consume himself in fruitless struggles. But when men are educated to
recognise the baser side of their own natures, it may be hoped they will
learn to understand and love their fellow-men better too. A decrease of
hypocrisy and an increase of tolerance towards oneself, can have only
good results in tolerance towards one's neighbours, for men are only too
easily disposed to extend to others the unfairness and violence which
they do to their own natures.

Freud's theory of repression does, indeed, seem to postulate the
existence only of people who, being too moral, are continually
repressing the immorality of their natural instincts. According to this
idea, the immoral man who allows his natural instincts an unbridled
existence should be proof against neurosis. But daily experience proves
this is obviously not the case; he may be just as neurotic as other men.
If we analyse him, we find that it is simply his decency that has been
repressed. Therefore, when an immoral man is neurotic, he represents
what Nietzsche appropriately described as "the pale criminal," a man who
does not stand upon the same level as his deed.[232]

The opinion may be held, that in such a case the repressed remnants
of decency are merely infantile traditional legacies, that impose
unnecessary fetters upon natural instincts, for which reason they should
be eradicated. The principle "écraser l'infâme" would be the natural
culmination of such an absolute let-instinct-live theory.[233] That
would obviously be quite phantastic and nonsensical. It should, indeed,
never be forgotten--and the Freudian School needs this reminder--that
morality was not brought down upon tables of stone from Sinai and forced
upon the people, but that morality is a function of the human soul,
which is as old as humanity itself. Morality is not inculcated from
without. Man has it primarily within himself--not the law indeed, but
the essence of morals.

After all, does a more moral view-point exist than the let-instinct-live
theory? Is there a more heroic morality than this? That is why
Nietzsche, the heroic, is especially partial to it. It is natural and
inborn cowardice that makes people say, "God preserve me from following
my instincts," thinking that they thus prove their high moral standard.
They do not understand that following one's bent is really much too
costly for them, too strenuous, too dangerous, and finally it cuts
somewhat against that sense of decency which most people associate
rather with taste than with a categorical imperative. The unpardonable
fault of the let-instinct-live theory is, that it is much too heroic,
too idealogic for the multitude.

There is, therefore, probably no other way for the immoral man but
to accept the moral corrective of his unconscious, just as he who
is moral must come to terms as best he may, with his demons of the
netherworld. It cannot be gainsaid that the Freudian School is so
convinced of the fundamental, and even exclusive importance of
sexuality in neurosis, that it has been courageous enough to face the
consequences of its convictions by heroically attacking the sexual
morality of the present day. Many different opinions prevail upon
this subject. What is significant is, that the problem of sexual
morality is being widely discussed at the present time. This is
doubtless both useful and necessary, for hitherto we have not really
had any sexual morality at all, but merely a low barbaric view, quite
insufficiently differentiated. In the Middle Ages, usury was considered
absolutely despicable, for at that time the morality of finance was
not casuistically differentiated; there was nothing but a kind of
lump-morality. So nowadays, there exists nothing but sexual morality in
the lump. A girl who has an illegitimate child is condemned, without
any inquiry as to whether she is a decent person or not. Any form of
love that has no legal sanction is immoral, no matter whether it occurs
between thoughtful people of value or irresponsible scamps. People are
still barbarically hypnotised by the thing itself, to such an extent
that they forget the individual.

Therefore the discussion of and attack upon sexual morality of the
present day signifies at bottom, a moral deed, constraining people
towards a differentiated and really ethical conception of the subject.

As already stated, Freud sees the great conflict between the ego
and natural instinct chiefly under its sexual aspect. This aspect
does exist, but a big query should be placed behind its actuality.
The question is whether what appears in a sexual form must always
essentially be sexuality? It is conceivable that one instinct may
disguise itself under another. Freud himself has supplied several
notable instances of such a disguise, proving therewith, convincingly,
that many of the deeds and aims of human kind are, at bottom, nothing
but somewhat figurative expressions substituted, on account of
embarrassment, in place of important elementary things. The substitution
is not seen through on account of reasons of mutual consideration.
There is nothing to hinder certain elementary things being also pushed
conveniently into the foreground, in place of more necessary but less
pleasant ones, under the illusion that the elementary things only are
really in question.

_The theory of sexuality although one-sided is absolutely right up to
a certain point. It would, therefore, be just as false to repudiate it
as to accept it as universally valid._


III.--THE OTHER VIEWPOINT: THE WILL TO POWER.

We have so far considered the problem of the psychology of unconscious
processes mainly from the point of view of Freud. We have thereby
doubtless gained an inkling of a real truth, which perhaps our pride,
our consciousness of civilisation, tries to deny, although something
else in us affirms it. This situation is extremely irritating to
some people, arousing resistances, and at the same time they are
terror-stricken by it, a fact which they are most unwilling to
acknowledge. There is something terrible in admitting this conflict,
for it is an acknowledgment of being swayed by instinct. Has it ever
been understood what it means to confess to the sway of instinct?
Nietzsche desired to be so swayed and advocated it most seriously. He
even sacrificed himself throughout his whole life, with rare passion, to
the idea of the Superman, that is to the idea of the man who, obeying
his instincts, transcends even his very self. And what was the course of
his life? It turned out as Nietzsche himself prophesied in the passage
in "Zarathustra" relating to the fatal fall of the rope-dancer, of the
man who did not want to be "surpassed." Zarathustra says to the dying
rope-dancer: "Thy soul will be dead even sooner than thy body." And
later, the dwarf says to Zarathustra: "Oh, Zarathustra, thou stone of
wisdom! Thou threwest thyself high, but every thrown-stone must fall!
Condemned of thyself, and to thine own stoning: oh, Zarathustra, far
indeed threwest thou the stone--but upon _thyself_ will it recoil!"

When he cried his "ecce homo" over himself, it was again too late, and
the crucifixion of the soul began even before the body was dead. He
who thus taught _yea-saying_ to the instincts of life, must have his
own career looked at critically, in order to discover the effects of
this teaching upon the teacher. But if we consider his life from this
point of view, we must say that Nietzsche lived _beyond instinct_, in
the lofty atmosphere of heroic "sublimity." This height could only be
maintained by means of most careful diet, choice climate and above all
by many opiates. Finally, the tension of this living shattered his
brain. He spoke of yea-saying, but lived the nay. His horror of people,
especially of the animal man, who lives by instinct, was too great. He
could not swallow the toad of which he so often dreamt, and which he
feared he must yet gulp down. The Zarathustrian lion roared all the
"higher" men, who craved for life, back into the cavernous depths of the
unconscious. That is why his life does not convince us of the truth of
his teaching. The "higher man" should be able to sleep without chloral,
and be competent to live in Naumburg or Basle despite "the fogs and
shadows." He wants woman and offspring; he needs to feel he has some
value and position in the herd, he longs for innumerable commonplaces,
and not least for what is humdrum: it is this instinct that Nietzsche
did not recognise; it is, in other words, the natural animal instinct
for life.

But how did he live if it was not from natural impulse? Should Nietzsche
really be accused of a practical denial of his natural instincts? He
would hardly agree to that; indeed he might even prove, and that without
difficulty, that he really was following his instincts in the highest
sense. But we may well ask how is it possible that human instincts
could have led him so far from humanity, into absolute isolation,
into an aloofness from the herd which he supported with loathing and
disgust? One would have thought that instinct would have united, would
have coupled and begot, that it would tend towards pleasure and good
cheer, towards gratification of all sensual desires. But we have quite
overlooked the fact that this is only one of the possible directions
of instinct. There exists not only the instinct for the preservation
of the species (the sexual instinct), but also the instinct for the
preservation of the self.

Nietzsche obviously speaks of this latter instinct, that is of _the
will to power_. Whatever other kinds of instinct may exist are for him
only a consequence of the will to power. Viewed from the standpoint
of Freud's sexual-psychology this is a gross error, a misconception
of biology, a bad choice made by a decadent neurotic human being. For
it would be easy for any adherent of sexual psychology to prove that
all that was too lofty, too heroic, in Nietzsche's conception of the
world and of life, was nothing but a consequence of the repression
and misconception of "instinct," that is of the instinct that _this_
psychology considers fundamental.

This brings us to the _question of perception_, or rather it were
better to say of the various lenses through which the world may be
perceived. For it would hardly be permissible to pronounce a judgment
on a life like Nietzsche's. It was lived with rare consistency, from
the beginning to the fateful end, in accordance with his underlying
natural fundamental instinct for power. It would hardly do to pronounce
it to be merely figurative, otherwise we should make the same unjust
condemnation that Nietzsche pronounced upon his polar opposite Richard
Wagner, of whom he said, "_Everything in him is false_; what is genuine
is hidden or disguised. He is an actor, in every bad and good meaning
of the word." Why this judgment? Wagner is a precise representative of
that other fundamental instinct, which Nietzsche overlooked, and upon
which Freud's psychology is based. If we inquire whether the other main
instinct--that of power--was unconsidered by Freud, we shall find that
he has included it under the name of the "ego instinct." But these ego
instincts drag out an obscure existence, according to his psychology,
alongside the broad, all-too-broad, development of the sexual theme.
In reality, however, human nature wages a cruel and hardly-to-be-ended
warfare between the ego-principle and that of formless instinct. The ego
is all barriers; instinct, on the other hand, is without any limits.
Both principles are equally powerful. In a certain sense men may account
themselves fortunate in being conscious of only one instinct: therefore
he who is wise avoids getting to know the other. But if, after all,
he does get to know the other instinct, he is indeed a lost man. For
then he enters upon the Faustian conflict. Goethe has shown us in the
first part of "Faust" what the acceptance of instinct involves, and in
the second part, what the acceptance of the ego and of his gruesome
unconscious world would signify. Everything that is insignificant,
_petty_, and cowardly in us shrinks from it, and would avoid it--and
there is one admirable means of doing so. Namely, by discovering that
the other thing in us is "another fellow," a live man who actually
thinks, feels, does and desires all the things that are despicable
and odious. In this way the bogey is seized, and the battle against
him is begun to our satisfaction. Hence arise, also, those chronic
idiosyncrasies of which the history of morals has preserved a few
examples for us. The instance of Nietzsche contra Wagner, already cited,
is particularly transparent. But ordinary human life is crammed full of
such cases. It is by these ingenuous devices that man saves himself from
the Faustian catastrophe for which he evidently lacks both courage and
strength. But a sincere man knows that even his bitterest opponent, or
any number of them, does not by any means equal his one worst adversary,
that is his other self who "bides within his breast." Nietzsche
unconsciously had Wagner _in himself_, that is why he envied him his
Parsifal. But even worse, he was a Saul and also had Paul within. That
is why Nietzsche became a stigmatised outcast of the Spirit; he had like
Saul to experience Christification when "the other self" inspired him
with his "ecce homo." Which man in him "broke down before the cross,"
Wagner or Nietzsche?

It was ordained by destiny that one of Freud's earliest pupils,
Adler,[234] should formulate a view of neurosis as founded exclusively
upon the principle of power. It is interesting and even fascinating to
observe how totally different the same things appear when viewed in
another light. In order to emphasise the main contrast, I would like at
once to draw attention to the fact that, according to Freud, everything
is a strictly causal consequence of previously-occurring facts; Adler,
on the contrary, sees everything as a finally conditioned arrangement.
To take a simple example: A young woman begins to have attacks of
terror. She wakes at night from some nightmare with a piercing cry;
calming herself with difficulty, she clings to her husband, imploring
him not to leave her, making him repeat again and again that he loves
her, etc. Gradually a nervous asthma develops, attacks of which also
come on during the day.

In such a case, the Freudian system begins at once to burrow in the
inner causality of the illness: What did the initial anxiety-dreams
contain. She recalls wild bulls, lions, tigers, bad men. What does the
patient associate with them? She told a story of something that had
happened to her when she was still single. It ran as follows: She was
staying at a summer-resort in the mountains, a great deal of tennis
was played, the usual acquaintances being made. There was a young
Italian who played particularly well, and who also knew how to handle
the guitar in the evenings. A harmless flirtation developed, leading
once to a moon-light walk. On this occasion, the Italian temperament
"unexpectedly" broke through, running away with the young man to the
great terror of the unsuspecting girl. He "looked at her with such a
look," that she could never forget it. This look follows her even in
her dreams; the wild animals that persecuted her had it. As a matter
of fact, does this look originally come from the Italian? Another
reminiscence enlightens us. The patient had lost her father through an
accident, when she was about fourteen years old. The father was a man
of the world, and travelled a great deal. Not long before his death
he took her to Paris, where, among other things, they visited the
_Follies Bergères_. Something happened there that at the time made a
deep impression upon her. As they were leaving the theatre, a rouged
female suddenly pressed close up to her father in an impertinent way.
She looked at her father in fear as to what he would do--and then she
saw that look, that animal glare in his eyes. An inexplicable something
clung to her day and night. From this moment her attitude to her father
was quite changed. At one instant she was irritable and full of venomous
moods, at another she loved him extravagantly; then causeless fits of
crying suddenly began, and, for a time, whenever her father was at home,
she was tormented by terrible choking at table, with apparent attacks of
suffocation, which were usually followed by voicelessness lasting from
one to two days. When the news of her father's sudden death arrived, she
was overcome by uncontrolled grief ending in hysterical laughter. But
she soon calmed down, her condition improving quickly, and the neurotic
symptoms disappearing almost completely. It seemed as if a veil of
forgetfulness had descended over the past. Only the experience with the
Italian roused something in her of which she was afraid. She had broken
off completely with the young man. A few years later she married. The
present neurosis only began after the birth of her second child, that is
at the moment when she discovered that her husband took a certain tender
interest in another woman.

This history raises a number of questions. For instance, what do we know
about the mother? It should be said of her that she was very nervous,
and had tried many kinds of sanatoria and systems of cure. She also
had symptoms of fear and nervous asthma. The relations between her and
her husband had been very strained as far back as the patient could
remember. The mother did not understand the father; the daughter always
felt that she understood him better. She was moreover her father's
declared favourite, being inwardly correspondingly cool towards her
mother.

These facts are indications for a survey of the meaning of the illness.
Behind the present symptoms phantasies are operative, connected in
the first place with the young Italian, but further clearly referring
to the father, whose unhappy marriage furnished the little daughter
with an early opportunity of acquiring a position that really should
have been filled by her mother. Behind this conquest there lies, of
course, a phantasy of being the woman who was really suited to her
father. The first attack of neurosis broke out at the moment when
this phantasy received a violent shock, presumably similar to that the
mother had once experienced (a fact that was, however, unknown to the
child). The symptoms are easily comprehensible as the expression of
disappointed and rejected love. The choking is based upon a sensation of
tightening in the throat that is a well-known accompanying phenomenon
of violent effects which we cannot quite "swallow." The metaphors of
language often refer to similar physiological occurrences. When the
father died, it seemed that her consciousness sorrowed deeply but her
unconscious laughed, after the manner of Till Eulenspiegel, who was sad
when he went downhill but was jolly when climbing laboriously, happy
in anticipation of what was coming. When the father was at home the
girl was low-spirited and ill, but whenever he was away she felt much
better. Herein she resembles numerous husbands and wives who as yet are
mutually hiding from each other the secret that they are not under all
circumstances indispensable to one another.

That the unconscious had some right to laugh was shown by the subsequent
period of good health. She succeeded in letting all that had passed
retire behind the trap-door. The experience with the Italian, however,
threatened to bring the netherworld up again. But she quickly pulled the
handle and shut the door. She remained quite well until the dragon of
neurosis came creeping in, just when she imagined herself to be already
safely out of her troubles, in the so-to-say perfected state of wife and
mother. Sexual psychology finds the cause of the neurosis in the fact
that the patient is not at bottom free from the father. This forces her
to resuscitate her former experience at the moment when she discovered
in the Italian the very same disturbing something that had formerly made
such a deep impression upon her when perceived in her father. These
recollections were naturally revived by the analogous experience with
another man, and formed the starting-point of the neurosis. It might
therefore be said that the content and cause of the neurosis lay in the
conflict between the phantastic infantile-erotic relation to the father
on the one hand, and her love for the husband on the other.

But if we now consider the course of the same illness from the
standpoint of the other instinct, that is, of the will to power, a
different complexion is put upon the matter. Her parents' unhappy
marriage afforded an excellent opportunity for the exhibition of
childish instinct for power. The instinct for power desires that, under
all circumstances, the ego should be "on top," whether by straight or
crooked means. At all costs the integrity of the personality must be
preserved.

Every attempt, even what appears to be an attempt of the surroundings,
to bring about the slightest subjection of the individual, is retorted
to by the "masculine protest," as Adler expresses it. The mother's
disappointment and her taking refuge in a neurosis brought about an
opportunity for the development of power and the attainment of a
dominating position. Love and excellence of conduct are, as everybody
knows, extremely well-adapted weapons for the purposes of the instinct
for power. Virtue is not seldom made the means of _forcing_ recognition
from others. Already as a child she knew how to obtain a privileged
position with her father by means of specially pleasing and amiable
behaviour, even occasionally to supplant her mother. This was not out
of love for her father, although love was a good means of obtaining the
coveted superiority. The hysterical laughter at the death of her father
is a striking proof of this fact. One is inclined to consider such an
explanation as a deplorable depreciation of love, if not actually a
malicious insinuation. But let us pause a moment, reflect, and look
at the world as it really is. Have we never seen those innumerable
people who love, and believe in their love, only until its purpose is
achieved, and who then turn away as if they had never loved? And, after
all, does not Nature herself do the same? In fact, is a "purposeless"
love possible? If so, it belongs to the highest human virtues, which
confessedly are extremely rare. Perhaps there is a general disposition
to reflect as little as possible about the nature and purpose of love;
discoveries might be made which would show the value of one's own love
to be less considerable than we had supposed. However, it were dangerous
to life to subtract anything from the value of fundamental instincts,
perhaps specially so to-day, when we seem to have only a minimum of
values left.

So the patient had an attack of hysterical laughter at the death of her
father; she had finally arrived at the top. It was hysterical laughter,
therefore a psychogenic symptom, that is, something proceeding from
unconscious motives and not from those of the conscious ego. That is a
difference that should not be underrated, for it enables us to recognise
whence and how human virtues arise. Their contraries led to hell, that
is, in modern terms, to the unconscious, where the counterparts of our
conscious virtue have long been gathering. That is why our very virtue
makes us desire to know nothing of the unconscious; indeed, it is even
the summit of virtuous wisdom to maintain that there is no unconscious
at all. But unfortunately we are all in a like predicament with Brother
Medardus in E. T. A. Hoffman's "The Elixir of the Devil": somewhere
or other there exists a sinister, terrible brother, our own incarnate
counterpart bound to us by flesh and blood, who comprehends everything,
maliciously hoarding whatever we most desire should disappear beneath
the table.

The first outbreak of neurosis occurred in our patient at the moment
when she became aware of the fact that there was something in her
father which she did not control. And then it dawned upon her of what
use her mother's neurosis was. When one meets with an obstacle that
cannot be overcome by sensible and charming means, there yet exists an
arrangement hitherto unknown to her which her mother had been beforehand
in discovering, and that is neurosis. That is the reason why she now
imitates her mother. But, the astonished reader asks, what is supposed
to be the use of neurosis? What does it effect? Whoever has had a
pronounced case of neurosis in his immediate environment, knows all
that can be "effected" by a neurosis. In fact, there is altogether no
better means of tyrannising over a whole household than by a striking
neurosis. Heart attacks, choking fits, convulsions of all kinds achieve
enormous effects, that can hardly be surpassed. Picture the fountains
of pity let loose, the sublime anxiety of the dear kind parents, the
hurried running to and fro of the servants, the incessant sounding
of the call to the telephone, the hasty arrival of the physicians,
the delicacy of the diagnosis, the detailed examinations, the lengthy
courses of treatment, the considerable expense; and there, in the midst
of all the uproar, lies the innocent sufferer, to whom the household is
even overflowingly grateful, when he has recovered from the "spasms."

The girl discovered this incomparable "arrangement" (to use Adler's
term), applying it on occasion when the father was there with success.
It became unnecessary when the father died, for now she was finally
uppermost. The Italian was soon dismissed, because he laid too much
stress upon her femininity by an inopportune reminder of his manliness.
When the way opened to the possibility of a suitable marriage, she
loved, adapting herself without any complaint to the deplorable rôle of
the queen bee. As long as she held the position of admired superiority,
everything went splendidly. But when her husband evinced a small outside
interest, she was obliged again to have recourse to the extremely
efficacious "arrangement," that is, to the indirect application of
power, because she had once again come upon that thing--this time in
her husband--that had already previously withdrawn her father from her
influence.

That is how the matter appears from the standpoint of the psychology of
power. I fear that the reader will feel as did the Kadi, before whom
the counsel of one party spoke first. When he had ended, the Kadi said:
"Thou hast spoken well. I perceive that thou art right." Then spoke the
counsel for the other party, and when he had ended, the Kadi scratched
himself behind his ear and said: "Thou hast spoken well. I perceive
that thou also art right." There is no doubt that the instinct for
power plays a most extraordinary part. It is true that the complexes of
neurotic symptoms are also exquisite "arrangements," that inexorably
realise their aims with incredible obstinacy and unequalled cunning. The
neurosis is final; that is, it is directed towards an aim. Adler merits
considerable distinction for having demonstrated this.

Which of the two points of view is right? That is a question that might
well cause much brain-racking. For the two explanations cannot be simply
combined, being absolutely contradictory. In one case, it is love and
its course that is the principal and decisive fact; and in the other
case, it is the power of the ego. In the first case the ego is merely
a kind of appendage to the passion for love; and in the second love is
upon occasion merely a means to the end, that of gaining the upper hand.
Whoever has the power of the ego most at heart rebels against the former
conception, whilst he who cares most about love, will never be able to
be reconciled to the latter.


IV.--THE TWO TYPES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

It is at this point that our most recent researches may suitably be
introduced. We have found, in the first place, that there are two types
of human psychology.[235] In the one type the fundamental function is
feeling, and in the other it is thought. The one feels his way into
the object, the other thinks about it. The one adapts himself to his
surroundings by feeling, thinking coming later; whilst the other adapts
himself by means of thought, preceded by understanding. The one who
feels his way transfers himself to some extent to the object; whilst the
other withdraws himself from the object to some extent, or pauses before
it and reflects about it. The first we called the _extroverted_ type,
because in the main he goes outside himself to the object, the latter is
called the _introverted_ type, because in a major degree he turns away
from the object, withdrawing into himself and thinking about it.

These remarks only give the broadest outline of the two types. But
even this quite inadequate sketch enables us to recognise that the
two theories are the outcome of the contrast between the two types.
The sexual theory is promulgated from the standpoint of feeling, the
power theory from that of thought; for the extrovert always places the
accent upon the feelings that are connected with the object, whereas the
introvert always puts the accent upon the ego, and is as much detached
by thought from the object as possible.

_The irreconcilable contradictions of the two theories are now to
be understood, because both theories are the product of a one-sided
psychology._ We find an instance of the contrast of types in Nietzsche
and Wagner. The dissension between the two is due to the contrast in
their ideas of psychological values. What is most prized by the one is
"affectation" for the other, and is deemed false to the very core. Each
depreciates the other.

If we apply the sexual theory to an extrovert it tallies with the facts
of the case; but if we apply it to an introvert, we simply maltreat
and do violence to his psychology. The same applies to the contrary
case. The relative rightness of the two hostile theories is explained
by the fact that each one draws its material from cases that prove the
correctness of the theory. There is a remnant of persons whom neither
theory fits--has not every rule its exceptions?

Criticism of both theories is indispensable. Recognition of facts showed
the necessity of overcoming their contrast, and of evolving a theory
that should do justice not only to one or the other type, but equally to
both.

Even the layman will to some extent have been struck by the fact that in
spite of their correctness both theories really have a very unpleasant
character and one not altogether pertinent under all circumstances
to the strict views of science. The sexual theory is unæsthetic and
unsatisfying intellectually. The power theory, on the other hand, is
decidedly venomous. Both inevitably reduce high-flown ideals, heroic
attitudes, pathos, and deep convictions, in a painful manner to a
reality which is hackneyed and trite; that is, if these theories are
applied to such things--but they should certainly not be so applied.
Both theories are really only therapeutic instruments out of the
tool-chest of the physician, whose sharp and merciless knife cuts out
all that is pernicious and diseased. It was just such a misapplication
of theory Nietzsche tried with his destructive criticism of ideals.
He regarded ideals as rampant diseases of the soul of humanity; as
indeed they really are. However, in the hands of a good physician who
really knows the human soul, who, as Nietzsche says, "has a finger
for the slightest shade," who applies the treatment only to what is
really diseased in a soul--in such hands both theories prove wholesome
caustics. The application must be adapted to the individual case. It is
a dangerous therapy in the hands of those who do not understand how to
deal out the treatment. These applications of criticism do good when
there is something that should and must be destroyed, dissolved or
brought low, but can easily damage what is being built up, or growing in
response to life's requirements.

Both theories might, therefore, be allowed to pass without attack, in
so far as they, like medicinal poisons, are entrusted to the safe hands
of the physician. But fate has ordained that they should not remain
solely in the care of those who are qualified to use them. First of all
they naturally became known to the medical public. Every practising
physician has an indefinitely high percentage of neurotics among his
patients; he is therefore more or less obliged to look out for new and
suitable systems of treatment. He ultimately lights upon the difficult
method of psychoanalysis. He is at first not competent for this, for how
should he have learnt about the secrets of the human soul? Certainly
not through his academic studies. The smattering of psychiatry that he
acquired for his examination barely suffices to enable him to recognise
the symptoms of the commonest mental disturbances, and is far from
giving him any sufficient insight into the human soul. He is, therefore,
practically quite unprepared to apply the analytic method. An unusually
far-reaching knowledge of the soul is indeed necessary in order to be
able to apply this caustic treatment with advantage. One must be in
a position to differentiate elements that are diseased and should be
discarded, from those which are valuable and should be retained. This
is plainly a matter of great difficulty. Any one who wishes to get a
vivid impression of the way in which a psychologysing physician may
unwarrantably violate a patient through an ignoble pseudo-scientific
prejudice, should read what Moebius has written about Nietzsche. Or he
may study various psychiatric writings about the "case of Christ," and
will surely not hesitate to lament the lot of the patient whose fate it
is to meet with such "understanding." Psychoanalysis--greatly to the
regret of the medical man who, however, had not accepted it--then passed
over into the hands of the teaching profession. This is right: for it is
really, when rightly understood and handled, an educational method, and
one of the social sciences. I would, however, never personally recommend
that Freud's purely sexual analysis should be exclusively applied as an
educational method. It might do much harm because of its one-sidedness.
In order to make psychoanalysis available for educational purposes, all
the metamorphoses that have been the work of the last few years were
needed. The method had to be expanded from a general psychological point
of view.

But the two theories of which I have spoken are not general theories.
They are, as I have said, caustics to be applied, so to say, "locally,"
for they are both destructive and reductive. They explain to the patient
that his symptoms come from here or there, and are "nothing but" this or
that. It would be very unjust to wish to maintain that this reductive
theory is wrong in a given case, but when exalted into a general
explanation of the nature of the soul--whether sick or healthy--_a
reductive theory becomes impossible_. For the human soul, whether it be
sick or healthy, cannot be _merely_ reductively explained. Sexuality
it is true is always and everywhere present; the instinct for power
certainly does penetrate the heights and the depths of the soul; but
the soul itself is not solely either the one or the other, or even both
together, it is also that which it has made and will make out of them
both. A person is only half understood when one knows how everything
in him came about. Only a dead man can be explained in terms of the
past, a living one must be otherwise explained. Life is not made up
of yesterdays only, nor is it understood nor explained by reducing
to-day to yesterday. Life has also a to-morrow, and to-day is only
understood if we are able to add the indications of to-morrow to our
knowledge of what was yesterday. This holds good for all expressions of
psychological life, even for symptoms of disease. Symptoms of neurosis
are not merely consequences of causes that once have been, whether they
were "infantile sexuality" or "infantile instinct for power." They are
endeavours towards a new synthesis of life. It must immediately be
added, however, they are endeavours that have miscarried. None the less
they are attempts; they represent the germinal striving which has both
meaning and value. They are embryos that failed to achieve life, owing
to unpropitious conditions of an internal and external nature.

The reader will now probably propound the question: What possible value
and meaning can a neurosis have? Is it not a most useless and repulsive
pest of humanity? Can being nervous do anybody good? Possibly, in a way
similar to that of flies and other vermin, which were created by God
in order that man might exercise the useful virtue of patience. Stupid
as this thought is from the standpoint of natural science, it might be
quite shrewd from that of psychology; that is, if we substitute "nervous
symptoms" in the place of "vermin." Even Nietzsche, who had an uncommon
disdain for anything stupid and trite in thought, more than once
acknowledged how much he owed to his illness. I have known more than one
person who attributed all his usefulness, and the justification for his
existence even, to a neurosis, that hindered all decisive stupidities
of his life, _compelling_ him to lead an existence which developed what
was valuable in him; material that would have been crushed had not the
neurosis with its iron grip forced the man to keep to the place where
he really belonged. There are people the meaning of whose life--whose
real significance--lies in the unconscious; in consciousness lies only
all that is vain and delusive. With others the reverse is the case, and
for them the neurosis has another significance. An extended reduction is
appropriate to the one, but emphatically unsuitable to the other.

The reader will now, indeed, be inclined to agree to the possibility
of certain cases of neurosis having such a significance but will
nevertheless be ready to deny an expediency that is so far-reaching
and full of meaning to ordinary cases of this illness. What value, for
instance, might there be in the afore-mentioned case of asthma and
hysterical attacks of fear? I confess that the value here is not so
obvious, especially if the case be looked at from the standpoint of a
reductive theory, that is, from that of a _chronique scandaleuse_ of the
psychological development of an individual.

We perceive that both the theories hitherto discussed have this one
point in common, viz. they relentlessly disclose everything that is
valueless in people. They are theories, or rather hypotheses, which
explain wherein the cause of the sickness lies. They are accordingly
concerned not with the _values_ of a person, but with his lack of value
that makes itself evident in a disturbing way. From this point of view,
it is possible to be reconciled to both standpoints.

A "value" is a possibility by means of which energy may attain
development. But in so far as a negative value is also a possibility
through which energy may attain development--as may, for instance,
be clearly seen in the very considerable manifestations of energy
shown in neurosis--it also stands for a value, albeit it brings about
manifestations of energy which are useless and harmful. In itself energy
is neither useful nor harmful, neither full of value nor lacking in it;
it is indifferent, everything depending upon the _form_ into which it
enters. The form gives the quality to the energy. On the other side,
mere form without energy is also indifferent. Therefore in order to
bring about a positive value, on the one hand energy is necessary,
and upon the other a valuable form. In a neurosis psychic energy is
undoubtedly present, but in an inferior and not realisable form. Both
the analytic methods that have been discussed above are of service only
as solvents of this inferior form. They prove themselves good here as
caustics.

By these methods we gain energy that is certainly free, but which, being
as yet unapplied, is indifferent. Hitherto the supposition prevailed,
that this newly acquired energy was at the patient's conscious disposal,
that he might apply it in any way he liked. In so far as it was thought
that the energy was nothing but the sexual impulse, people spoke of
a sublimated application of the same, under the presumption that the
patient could, without further ado, transfer what was thought of as
sexual energy into a "sublimation"; that is, into a non-sexual form
of use. It might, for instance, be transferred to the cultivation of
an art, or to some other good or useful activity. According to this
concept, the patient had the possibility of deciding, either arbitrarily
or from inclination, how his energy should be sublimated.

This conception may be accorded a justification for its existence, in
so far as it is at all possible for a human being to assign a definite
direction to his life, in which its course should run. But we know that
there is no human forethought nor philosophy which can enable us to give
our lives a prescribed direction, except for quite a short distance.
Destiny lies before us, perplexing us, and teeming with possibilities,
and yet only one of these many possibilities is our own particular right
way. Who should presume to designate the one possibility beforehand,
even though he have the most complete knowledge of his own character
that a man can have? Much can certainly be attained by means of
will-power. But having regard to the fate of certain personalities with
particularly strong wills, it is entirely misleading for us to want
at all costs to change our own fate by power of will. Our will is a
function that is directed by our _powers of reflection_; it depends,
therefore, upon how our powers of reflection are constituted. In order
to deserve its name reflection must be _rational_, that is, according
to reason. But has it ever been proved, or can it ever be proved, that
life and destiny harmonise with our human reason, that is, that they
are exclusively rational? On the contrary, we have ground for supposing
that they are also irrational, that is to say, that in the last resort
they too are based in regions beyond the human reason. The irrationality
of the great process is shown by its so-called _accidentalness_, which
perforce we ought to deny, since, obviously, we cannot think of a
process not being causally and necessarily conditioned. But actually,
accidentality exists everywhere, and does so indeed so obtrusively that
we might as well pocket our causal philosophy! The rich store of life
both is, and is not, determined by law; it is at the same time rational
and irrational. Therefore, the reason and the will founded upon it are
only valid for a short distance. The further we extend this rationally
chosen direction, the surer we may be that we are thereby excluding the
irrational possibilities of life, which have, however, just as good
a right to be lived. Aye, we even injure ourselves, since we cut off
the wealth of accidental eventualities by a too rigid and conscious
direction. It was certainly very expedient for man to be able to give
his life a direction; it would, therefore, be quite right to maintain
that the attainment of reasonableness was the greatest achievement of
mankind. But that is not to say that under all circumstances, this must
or will always continue to be the case. The present fearful catastrophic
world-war has tremendously upset the most optimistic upholder of
rationalism and culture.

In 1913 Ostwald wrote[236] as follows: "The whole world agrees that the
present state of armed peace is untenable, and is gradually becoming an
impossible condition. It demands tremendous sacrifices from individual
nations far surpassing the outlay for cultural purposes, without any
positive values being gained thereby. Therefore, if mankind could
discover ways and means of putting an end to these preparations for a
war _that will never come_, this conscripting of a considerable part
of the nation at the best and most capable age for training for war
purposes, if it could overcome all the innumerable other injuries caused
by the present customs, such an enormous saving of energy would be
effected, that an undreamt-of development of the evolution of culture
might be expected. For like a hand-to-hand fight, war is the oldest, and
also the most unsuitable of all possible means of solving a conflict
between wills, being indeed accompanied by the most deplorable waste of
energy. The complete setting aside of potential as well as of actual
warfare is, therefore, absolutely one of the most important tasks of
culture in our time, a real necessity from the point of view of energy."

But the irrationality of destiny ordained otherwise than the rationality
of the well-meaning thinker; since it not only determined to use the
piled-up weapons and soldiers, but much more than that, it brought about
a tremendous insane devastation and unparalleled slaughter. From this
catastrophe humanity may possibly draw the conclusion, that only one
side of fate can be mastered by rational intention.

What can be said of mankind in general applies also to individuals, for
mankind as a whole consists of nothing but individuals. And whatever
the psychology of mankind is, that is also the psychology of the
individual. We are experiencing in the world-war a fearful balancing-up
with the rational intentionality of organised culture. What is called
"will" in the individual, is termed "imperialism" among nations, for
the will is a demonstration of power over fate, that is, exclusion
of what is accidental. The organisation of culture is a rational and
"expedient" sublimation of free and indifferent energies, brought about
by design and intention. The same is the case in the individual. And
just as the hope of a universal international organisation of culture
has experienced a cruel right-about through this war, so also must
the individual, in the course of his life, often find that so-called
"disposable" energies do not suffer themselves to be disposed of.

I was once consulted by a business man of about forty-five, whose case
is a good illustration of the foregoing. He was a typical American
self-made man, who had worked himself up from the bottom. He had been
successful, and had founded a very extensive business. He had also
gradually organised the business in such a way that he could now retire
from its management. He had indeed resigned two years before I saw him.
Until then he had only lived for his business, concentrating all his
energy upon it, with that incredible intensity and one-sidedness that is
so peculiar to the successful American man of business. He had bought
himself a splendid country seat, where he thought he would "live,"
which he imagined to mean keeping horses, automobiles, playing golf and
tennis, attending and giving parties, etc. But he had reckoned without
his host. The energy that had become "disposable" did not enter into
these tempting prospects, but betook itself capriciously to quite other
ways. A couple of weeks after the commencement of his longed-for life
of bliss, he began to brood over peculiar vague physical sensations. A
few more weeks sufficed to plunge him into an unprecedented state of
hypochondria. His nerves broke down completely. He, who was physically
an uncommonly strong and exceptionally energetic man, became like a
whining child. And that put an end to all his paradise. He fell from
one apprehension to another, worrying himself almost to death. He
then consulted a celebrated specialist, who immediately perceived
quite rightly that there was nothing wrong with the man but lack of
employment. The patient saw the sense of this, and betook himself to
his former position. But to his great disappointment no interest for
his business presented itself. Neither the application of patience nor
determination availed to help. His energy would not by any means be
forced back into the business. His condition naturally became worse than
before. Energy that hitherto had been actively creative was now turned
back into himself, with fearfully destructive force. His creative genius
rose up, so to speak, in revolt against him, and instead of, as before,
producing great organisations in the world, his demon now created
equally clever systems of hypochondriac fallacies, by which the man was
absolutely crushed. When I saw him, he was already a hopeless moral
ruin. I tried to make clear to him that such a gigantic amount of energy
might indeed be withdrawn from business, but the problem remained as
to where it should go. The finest horses, the fastest automobiles, and
the most amusing parties are in themselves no inducement for energy,
although it is certainly quite rational to think that a man who has
devoted his whole life to serious work, has a natural right to enjoy
himself. This would necessarily be the case if things happened "humanly"
in destiny; first would come work, then well-earned leisure. But things
happen irrationally and inconveniently enough, energy requires a
congenial channel, otherwise it is dammed up and becomes destructive. My
arguments met with no response, as was indeed to be expected. Such an
advanced case can only be taken care of till death; it cannot be cured.

This case clearly illustrates the fact that it does not lie in our power
to transfer a "disposable" energy to whatever rationally chosen object
we may like. Exactly the same may be said of those apparently available
energies that are made available by the fact that the psychoanalytical
caustic has destroyed their unsuitable forms. These energies can be
arbitrarily applied, as has already been said, at the very most only
for a short time. They resist following the rationally presented
possibilities for any length of time. Psychic energy is indeed a
fastidious thing, that insists upon having its own conditions fulfilled.
There may be ever so much energy existing, but we cannot make it useful,
so long as we do not succeed in finding a congenial channel for it.

The whole of my research work for the last years has been concentrated
upon this question. The _first stage_ of this work was to discover
the extent to which the two theories discussed above were tenable.
The _second stage_ consisted in the recognition of the fact, that
these two theories correspond to two opposite psychological types,
which I have designated the introversion and the extroversion types.
William James[237] was struck by the existence of these two types
among thinkers. He differentiated them as the "tough-minded," and
the "tender-minded." Similarly, Ostwald[238] discovered an analogous
difference in the classical and romantic types among great scholars.
I am not therefore alone in my ideas about the types, as is testified
by mentioning only these two well-known names out of many others.
Historical researches have proved to me that not a few of the great
controversies in the history of thought were based upon the contrast
between the types. The most significant case of this kind is the
contrast between nominalism and realism, which, beginning with the
difference between the Platonic and the Megarian schools, descended
to scholastic philosophy, where Abelard won the immortal distinction
of at least having ventured an attempt to unite the two contradictory
standpoints in conceptualism. This conflict has continued down to the
present day, where it finds expression in the antagonism of spiritualism
and materialism.

Just as in the general history of thought, so too every individual has
a share in this contrast of types. Close investigation proves that
people of opposite types have an unconscious predilection for marrying
each other, that they may mutually complement one another. Each type
has one function that is specially well developed, the introvert using
his thought as the function of adaptation, thinking beforehand about
how he shall act; whilst the extrovert, on the contrary, feels his way
into the object by acting. To some extent he acts beforehand. Hence
by daily application the one has developed his thought, and the other
his feeling. In extreme cases the one limits himself to thinking and
observing, and the other to feeling and acting. It is true that the
introvert feels also, very deeply indeed, almost too deeply; that is
why an English investigator[239] has gone so far as to describe his as
"the emotional type." True, the emotion is there, but it all remains
inside, and the more passionate and deeper his feeling is, the quieter
is his outward demeanour. As the proverb puts it, "Still waters run
deep." Similarly, the extrovert _thinks_ also, but that likewise mostly
inside, whilst his feelings visibly go outside, that is why he is held
to be full of feeling whilst the introvert is considered cold and dry.
But as the feeling of the thinker goes inwards, it is not developed as
a function adapted to external situations, but remains in a relatively
undeveloped state. Similarly the thinking of one who feels remains also
relatively undeveloped.

But if comparatively well-adapted individuals are under consideration,
then the introvert will normally be found to have his feeling directed
outwards, and the result may be extraordinarily deceptive. He shows
feelings; he is amiable, sympathetic, even emotional. But a critical
examination of the expressions of his feelings reveals that they are
markedly conventional. They are not individualised. He shows to every
one, without any essential difference, the same friendliness and the
same sympathy; whilst the extrovert's expressions of feeling are
throughout delicately graded and individualised. With the introvert
the expression of feelings is really a gesture that is artificially
adopted and conventional. Similarly, the extrovert may apparently
think, and that even very clearly and scientifically. But upon closer
investigation, his thoughts are found to be really foreign property,
merely conventional forms which have been artificially acquired. They
lack anything individual and original, and are just as lukewarm and
colourless as the conventional feelings of the introvert. Under these
conventional disguises, quite other things are slumbering in both, which
occasionally when awakened by some overpowering effect, suddenly break
out to the astonishment and horror of the environment.

Most civilised people incline more to one type than the other. Taken
together they would supplement each other exceedingly well. That is why
they are so apt to marry one another, and so long as they are fully
occupied with adapting themselves to the necessities of life they suit
one another splendidly. But if the man has earned a competence, or if
a big legacy drop from the sky, terminating the external urgencies of
life, then they have time to occupy themselves with each other. Until
now they stood back to back, defending themselves against want. But
now they turn to each other expecting to understand one another; and
they make the discovery that they have never understood one another.
They speak different languages. Thus the conflict between the two types
of psychology begins. This conflict is venomous, violent and full of
mutual depreciation, even if it be conducted very quietly in the utmost
intimacy. _This is so because the value of the one is the worthlessness
of the other._ The one, starting from the standpoint of his valuable
thinking, takes for granted that the feelings of the other correspond
to his own inferior feelings, this because he knows absolutely nothing
of any other feelings. But the other, starting from the standpoint of
his valuable feelings, assumes that his partner has the same inferior
thought that he himself has. Evidently there is plenty of work here for
Goethe's Homunculus, who had to find out "why husband and wife get on so
badly." Now as many cases of neurosis have a basis in such differences,
I, as a physician, found myself obliged to relieve the Homunculus of
some of his ungrateful task. I am glad to be able to say that many a
sufferer has been helped in grave difficulties by the enlightenment I
could give.

The _third stage_ of the path of increasing understanding consisted
in formulating a theory of the psychology of types which would be of
practical use for the development of man. Viewed from the newly-gained
standpoint, there resulted, first of all, _a totally new theory of
psychogenic disturbances_.

The foundation of the facts remains the same: the first hypothesis of
every neurosis is the existence of an unconscious conflict. According to
Freud's theory, this is an erotic conflict, or to speak more exactly,
a battle of the moral consciousness against the unconscious infantile
sexual world of phantasy and its transference to external objects.
According to Adler's theory, it is a battle of the superiority of the
ego against all oppressive influences, whether from inside or outside.

But the new idea asserts that _the neurotic conflict always takes
place between the adapted function and the co-function that is
undifferentiated, and that lies to a great extent in the unconscious_;
therefore in the case of the introvert, between thought and unconscious
feeling, but in that of the extrovert, between feeling and unconscious
thought.[240] Another theory of the etiological moment results from
this. If a man who naturally adapts himself by thinking is faced by
a demand that cannot be met by thinking alone, but which requires
differentiated feeling, the traumatic or pathogenic conflict breaks
out. On the contrary, the critical moment comes to the man who adapts
by feeling when he is faced by a problem requiring differentiated
thought. The afore-mentioned case of the business man is a clear
example of this. The man was an introvert, who all through his life
had left every consideration of sentiment in the background, that is,
in the unconscious. But when, for the first time in his life, he found
himself in a situation in which nothing could be done except by means
of differentiated feeling, he failed utterly. At the same time, a very
instructive phenomenon occurred; his unconscious feelings manifested
themselves as _physical sensations_ of a vague nature. This fact
harmonises with a generally accepted experience in our psychology,
to wit, that undeveloped feelings partake of the character of vague
physical sensations, since undifferentiated feelings are as yet
identical with subjective physical sensations. Differentiated feelings
are of a more "abstract" objective nature. This phenomenon may well
be the unconscious basis of the earliest statement of psychological
types that is known to me; namely, the three types of the Valentinian
School. They held the undifferentiated type to be the so-called hylic
(material) man. He was ranked below the differentiated types, that is,
the psychic (soulful) man, who corresponds to the extroversion type;
and the pneumatic (spiritual) man, who corresponds to the introversion
type. For these gnostics the "pneumatikos" stood of course the highest.
Christianity, with its "psychic" (spiritual) nature (principle of love),
has indeed contested this privilege of the gnosis. But even this page
may be turned in the course of time: since, if the signs of the age are
not deceptive, we are now in the great final settlement of the Christian
epoch. We know that, evolution not being uniformly continuous, when one
form of creation has been outlived, the evolutionary tendency harks
back to resume that form which, after having made a beginning, was left
behind in an undeveloped state.

After this brief digression to generalities, let us return to our case.
If a similar disturbance were to take place in an extrovert, he would
have what are called hysterical symptoms, that is, symptoms that are
also of an apparently physical nature, which, as our theory indicates,
would this time represent the patient's unconscious undifferentiated
thought. As a matter of fact, we find also a widespread region of
phantasy as the basis of hysterical symptoms, of which many have
been described in detail in the literature of the subject. They are
phantasies of a pronounced sexual, that is physical complexion. But in
reality they are undifferentiated thoughts, which in common with the
undifferentiated feelings are to some extent physical, and therefore
appear as what may be called physical symptoms.

By taking up again here the thread that was dropped before, we can now
clearly see why it is precisely in the neurosis that those values which
are most lacking to the individual lie hidden. We might also now return
to the case of the young woman, and apply to it the newly-won insight.
She is an extrovert with an hysterical neurosis. Let us suppose that
this patient had been "analysed," that is, that the treatment having
made it clear to her what kind of unconscious thoughts lay behind her
symptoms, she had regained possession of the psychic energy which by
becoming unconscious had constituted the strength of the symptoms. The
following practical question now arises: what can be done with the
so-called available energy? It would be rational, and in accordance
with the psychological type of the invalid, to extrovert this energy
again, that is to transfer it to an object, as for instance to
philanthropic or some other useful activities. This way is possible only
in exceptional cases--there are energetic natures who do not shrink from
care and trouble in a useful cause, there are people who care immensely
about just such occupations--otherwise it is not feasible. For it must
not be forgotten, that in the case under consideration, the libido (that
is the technical expression for the psychic energy) has found its object
already unconsciously in the young Italian, or an appropriate real human
substitute. Under these circumstances such a desirable sublimation,
however natural, is out of the question. For the object of the energy
usually affords a better channel than an ethical activity, however
attractive. Unfortunately there are many people who always speak of a
person, not as he is, but as he would be if their desires for him were
realised. But the physician is necessarily concerned with the actual
personality, which will obdurately remain the same, until its real
character has been recognised on all sides. An analysis must necessarily
be based upon the recognition of naked reality, not upon any arbitrarily
selected phantasies about a person, however desirable.

The fact is that the so-called available energy unfortunately cannot be
arbitrarily directed as desired. It follows its own channel, one which
it had already found, even before we had quite released it from its
bondage to the unadapted form. For we now make the discovery that the
phantasies which were formerly occupied with the young Italian, have
been transferred to the physician himself. The physician has therefore
himself become the object of the unconscious libido. If this is not
the case, or if the patient will on no account acknowledge the fact of
transference, or again, if the physician either does not understand the
phenomenon at all, or does so wrongly, then violent resistances make
their appearance, which aim at completely breaking off relations with
the doctor. At this point patients leave and look for another doctor or
for people who "understand" them; or if they hopelessly relinquish this
search they go to pieces.

But if the transference to the physician takes place and is accepted,
a natural channel has thereby been found, which not only replaces the
former, but also makes a discharge of the energic process possible, and
provides a course that is relatively free from conflict. Therefore if
the libido is allowed its natural course, it will of its own accord find
its way into the transference. Where this is not the case, it is always
a question either of arbitrary rebellion against the laws of Nature, or
of some deficiency in the physician's work.

Into the transference every conceivable infantile phantasy is first of
all projected; these must then be subjected to the caustic, that is,
analytically dissolved. This was formerly called the _dissolution of the
transference_. Thereby the energy is freed from this unsuitable form
also, and once again we are confronted by the problem of disposable
energy. We shall find that an object affording the most favourable
channel has been chosen by Nature even before our search began.


V.--THE PERSONAL AND THE IMPERSONAL UNCONSCIOUS

The fourth stage of our newly won insight is now reached. The analytical
dissolution of the infantile transference phantasies was continued until
it became sufficiently clear, even to the patient, that he was making
his physician into father, mother, uncle, guardian, teacher, friend or
any other kind of surrogate for parental authority conceivable. But,
as experience is constantly proving, further phantasies make their
appearance, representing the physician as saviour or as some other
divine being. Obviously this is in flagrant contradiction to the sane
reasoning of consciousness. Moreover, it appears that these divine
attributes considerably overstep the bounds of the Christian conception
in which we grew up. They even assume the guise of heathen allurements,
and, for instance, not infrequently assume the form of animals.

The transference is in itself nothing but a projection of unconscious
contents on to the analyst. At first it is the so-called superficial
contents that are projected. During this stage the physician is
interesting as a possible lover (somewhat after the manner of the young
Italian in our case). Later on, he is a representation of the father,
and is the symbol either of kindness or of severity, according to what
the patient formerly imputed to his real father. Occasionally the doctor
even appears to the patient as a kind of mother, which, though sounding
somewhat strange, really lies well within the bounds of possibility.
All these projections of phantasy have an underlying basis of personal
reminiscences.

But presently other forms of phantasy appear, bearing an extravagantly
effusive and impossible character. The physician now appears to
be endowed with uncanny qualities; he may be either a wizard or a
demoniacal criminal, or his counterpart of virtue, a saviour. Later on
he appears as an incomprehensible mixture of both sides. It should be
clearly understood that the physician does not appear to the patient's
consciousness in these forms, but that phantasies come up to the surface
representing the doctor in this guise. If, as is not seldom the case,
the patient cannot forthwith perceive that his view of the physician
is a projection of his own unconscious, then he will probably behave
rather foolishly. Difficulties often arise at this stage of analysis,
making severe demands upon the good will and patience of both physician
and patient. In a few exceptional cases, a patient cannot refrain
from disseminating the stupidest tales about the physician. Such
people cannot get it into their head that, as a matter of fact, their
phantasies originate in themselves, and have nothing or very little to
do with the physician's actual character. The pertinacity of this error
arises from the circumstance that there is no foundation of personal
memory for this particular kind of projection. It is occasionally
possible to prove that similar phantasies, for which neither parent gave
reasonable occasion, had at some time in childhood been attached to the
father or mother.

In one of his shorter books, Freud has shown how Leonardo da Vinci
was influenced in his later life by the fact that he had two mothers.
The fact of the two mothers (or the double descent) had indeed a
reality in Leonardo's case, but it plays a part with other artists as
well. Benvenuto Cellini had this phantasy of a double descent. It is
unquestionably a mythological theme; many heroes of legend have two
mothers. The phantasy is not founded upon the actual fact of the hero's
having two mothers, but is a widespread "primordial image" belonging
to the secrets of the universal history of the human mind. It does not
belong to the sphere of personal reminiscences.

In every individual, in addition to the personal memories, there are
also, in Jacob Burckhardt's excellent phrase, the great "primordial
images," the inherited potentialities of human imagination. They have
always been potentially latent in the structure of the brain. The fact
of this inheritance also explains the otherwise incredible phenomenon,
that the matter and themes of certain legends are met with all the
world over in identical forms. Further, it explains how it is that
persons who are mentally deranged are able to produce precisely the
same images and associations that are known to us from the study of old
manuscripts. I gave some examples of this in my book on "The Psychology
of the Unconscious." I do not hereby assert the _transmission of
representations_, but only of the _possibility of such representations_,
which is a very different thing.

It is therefore in this further stage of the transference that those
phantasies are produced that have no basis in personal reminiscence.
Here it is a matter of the manifestation of the deeper layers of the
unconscious, where the primordial universally-human images are lying
dormant.

This discovery leads to the fourth stage of the new conception: that is,
to the recognition of a _differentiation in the unconscious itself_.
We are now obliged to differentiate a personal unconscious and an
impersonal or super-personal unconscious. We also term the latter the
_absolute or collective_ unconscious, because it is quite detached
from what is personal, and because it is also absolutely universal,
wherefore its contents may be found in every head, which of course is
not the case with the personal contents.

The primordial images are quite the most ancient, universal, and deep
thoughts of mankind. They are feeling just as much as thought, and might
therefore be termed _original thought-feelings_.

We have therewith now found the object selected by the libido when it
was freed from the personal-infantile form of transference. Namely, that
it sinks down into the depths of the unconscious, reviving what has
been dormant there from immemorial ages. It has discovered the buried
treasure out of which mankind from time to time has drawn, raising
thence its gods and demons, and all those finest and most tremendous
thoughts without which man would cease to be man.

Let us take as an example one of the greatest thoughts to which the
nineteenth century gave birth--the idea of the _conservation of energy_.
_Robert Mayer_ is the originator of this idea. He was a physician, not
a physicist nor a natural philosopher, to either of whom the creation
of such an idea would have been more germane. It is of great importance
to realise that in the real sense of the word, Robert Mayer's idea
was not _created_. Neither was it brought about through the fusion
of the then-existent conceptions and scientific hypotheses. It grew
in the originator, and was conditioned by him. Robert Mayer wrote
(1841) to Griesinger as follows: "I by no means concocted the theory
at the writing-desk." He goes on to report about certain physiological
investigations that he made in 1840-41 as doctor on board ship, and
continues: "If one wishes to be enlightened about physiological
matters, some knowledge of physical processes is indispensable, unless
one prefers to work from the metaphysical side, which is immensely
distasteful to me. I therefore kept to physics, clinging to the subject
with such ardour that, although it may well seem ridiculous to say so,
I cared little about what part of the world we were in. I preferred to
remain aboard where I could work uninterruptedly, and where many an
hour gave me such a feeling of _being inspired_ in a way I can never
remember having experienced either before or since.

"A few flashes of thought that thrilled through me"--this was in the
harbour of Surabaja--"were immediately diligently pursued, leading again
in their turn to new subjects. Those times are passed, but subsequent
quiet examination _of what then emerged_, has taught me that it was
a truth which can _not only be subjectively felt_, but also proved
objectively; whether this could be done by _one who has so little
knowledge_ of physics as I have, is a matter which obviously, I must
leave undecided."

Heim, in his book on Energetics, expresses the opinion: "that Robert
Mayer's new thought did not gradually detach itself by dint of revolving
it in his mind, from the conceptions of power transmitted from the past,
_but belongs to those ideas that are intuitively conceived, which,
originating in other spheres of a mental kind, surprise thought, as it
were, compelling it to transform its inherited notions conformably with
those ideas_."

The question now arises, whence did this new idea that forced itself
upon consciousness with such elemental power spring? And whence did
it derive such strength that it was able to effect consciousness so
forcibly that it could be completely withdrawn from all the manifold
impressions of a first voyage in the tropics? These questions are not
easy to answer. If we apply our theory to this case the explanation
would run as follows: _The idea of energy and of its conservation must
be a primordial image that lay dormant in the absolute unconscious_.
This conclusion obviously compels us to prove that a similar primordial
image did really exist in the history of the human mind, and continued
to be effective through thousands of years. As a matter of fact,
evidence of this can be produced without difficulty. _Primitive
religions, in the most dissimilar regions of the earth, are founded upon
this image._ These are the so-called _dynamistic religions_, whose sole
and distinctive thought is the existence of some universal magical power
upon which everything depends. The well-known English scholars, Taylor
and Frazer, both wrongly interpreted this idea as animism. Primitive
peoples do not mean souls or spirits by their conception of power, but
in reality something that the American investigator _Lovejoy_[241] most
aptly terms "primitive energetics."

In an investigation appertaining to this subject, I showed that this
notion comprises the idea of soul, spirit, God, health, physical
strength, fertility, magic power, influence, might, prestige, curative
remedies, as well as certain states of mind which are characterised
by the setting loose of affects. Among certain Polynesians "Melungu"
(that is this primitive concept of energy) is spirit, soul, demoniacal
being, magic, prestige. If anything astonishing happens, the people
cry "Melungu." This notion of power is also the first rendering of the
concept of God among primitive peoples. The image has undergone many
variations in the course of history. In the Old Testament this magic
power is seen in the burning bush, and shines in the face of Moses.
It is manifest in the Gospels as the outpouring of the Holy Spirit,
as cloven tongues of fire from heaven. In Heraclitus it appears as
universal energy, as "eternally living fire"; for the Persians it is the
fiery brightness, haôma, divine mercy; for the Stoics it is heimarmene,
the power of destiny. In mediæval legend it is seen as the aura, or the
halo of the saint. It blazes forth in great flames from the hut where
the saint is lying in ecstasy. The saints reflect the sum of this power,
the storehouse of light, in their faces. According to ancient concepts
this power is the soul itself; the idea of its immortality contains
that of its _conservation_. The Buddhistic and primitive conception of
the metempsychosis (transmigration of souls) contains the idea of its
_unlimited capacity for transformation under constant conservation_.

This thought has obviously therefore been imprinted on the human brain
for untold ages. That is why it lies ready in the unconscious of every
one. Only certain conditions are needed in order to let it appear
again. These conditions were obviously fulfilled in the example of
Robert Mayer. The greatest and best thoughts form themselves upon these
primordial images, which are the ancient common property of humanity.

After this instance of the nascence of new ideas out of the treasury
of primordial images, we will resume the further delineation of the
process of transference. It was seen that the libido of the patient
seizes upon its new object in those apparently preposterous and
peculiar phantasies, namely the contents of the absolute unconscious.
As I already observed, the unacknowledged projection of primordial
images upon the physician constitutes a danger for further treatment
which should not be undervalued. The images contain not only every
beautiful and great thought and feeling of humanity, but also every
deed of shame and devilry of which human beings have ever been capable.
Now, if the patient cannot differentiate the physician's personality
from these projections, there is an end to mutual understanding, and
human relations become impossible. If however the patient avoids this
Charybdis, he falls into the Scylla of _introjecting_ these images,
that is, he does not ascribe their qualities to the physician but to
himself. This peril is just as great. If he projects, he vacillates
between an extravagant and morbid deification, and a spiteful contempt
of his physician. In the case of introjection, he falls into a ludicrous
self-deification or moral self-laceration. The mistake that he makes
in both cases consists in attributing the contents of the absolute
unconscious to himself personally. Thus he makes himself into both
God and devil. This is the psychological reason why human beings have
always needed demons, and could not live without gods. There is the
exception, of course, of a few specially clever specimens of the _homo
occidentalis_ of yesterday and the day before--supermen whose God is
dead, wherefore they themselves become gods. There is also the example
of Nietzsche, who confessedly required chloral in order to be able
to exist. These supermen even become rationalistic petty gods, with
thick skulls and cold hearts. The concept of God is simply a necessary
psychological function of an irrational nature that has altogether no
connection with the question of God's existence. This latter question
is one of the most fatuous that can be put. It is indeed sufficiently
evident that man cannot conceive a God, much less realise that he
actually exists, so little is he able to imagine a process that is
not causally conditioned. Theoretically, of course, no accidentality
can exist, that is certain, once and for all. On the other hand, in
practical life, we are continually stumbling upon accidental happenings.
It is similar with the existence of God; it is once and for all an
absurd problem. But the _consensus gentium_ has spoken of gods for
æons past, and will be speaking of them in æons to come. Beautiful and
perfect as man may think his reason, he may nevertheless assure himself
that it is only one of the possible mental functions, coinciding merely
with the corresponding side of the phenomena of the universe. All around
is the irrational, that which is not congruous with reason. And this
irrationalism is likewise a psychological function, namely the absolute
unconscious; whilst the function of consciousness is essentially
rational. Consciousness must have rational relations, first of all in
order to discover some order in the chaos of disordered individual
phenomena in the universe; and secondly, in order to labour at whatever
lies within the area of human possibility. We are laudably and usefully
endeavouring to exterminate so far as is practicable the chaos of
what is irrational, both in and around us. Apparently we are making
considerable progress with this process. A mental patient once said to
me, "Last night, doctor, I disinfected the whole heavens with sublimate,
and yet did not discover any God." Something of the kind has happened
to us. Heraclitus, the ancient, that really very wise man, discovered
the most wonderful of all psychological laws, namely, the _regulating
function of antithesis_. He termed this "enantiodromia" (clashing
together), by which he meant that at some time everything meets with
its opposite. (Here I beg to remind the reader of the case of the
American business man, which shows the enantiodromia most distinctly.)
The rational attitude of civilisation necessarily terminates in its
antithesis, namely in the irrational devastation of civilisation. Man
may not _identify_ himself with reason, for he is not wholly a rational
being, and never can or ever will become one. That is a fact of which
every pedant of civilisation should take note. What is irrational
cannot and may not be stamped out. The gods cannot and may not die.
Woe betide those men who have disinfected heaven with rationalism;
God-Almightiness has entered into them, because they would not admit God
as an absolute function. They are identified with their unconscious, and
are therefore its sport. (For where God is nearest, there the danger is
greatest.) Is the present war supposed to be a war of economics? That
is a neutral American "business-like" standpoint, that does not take
the blood, tears, unprecedented deeds of infamy and great distress into
account, and which completely ignores the fact that this war is really
an _epidemic of madness_. The several parties project their unconscious
upon each other, hence the mad confusion of ideas in every head. This is
the enantiodromia that occurs in the individual life of man, as well as
in that of peoples. The legend of the Tower of Babel turns out to be a
tenable truth.

Only he escapes from the cruel law of enantiodromia who knows how to
separate himself from the unconscious--not by repressing it, for then
it seizes him from behind--_but by presenting it visibly to himself as
something that is totally different from him_.

This gives the solution of the Scylla and Charybdis problem which
I described above. The patient must learn to differentiate in his
thoughts between what is the ego and what is the non-ego. The latter is
the collective psyche or absolute unconscious. By this means he will
acquire the material with which henceforward, for a long time, he will
have to come to terms. Thereby the energy, that before was invested
in unsuitable pathological forms, will have found its appropriate
sphere. In order to differentiate the psychological ego from the
psychological non-ego, man must necessarily stand _upon firm feet_
in his ego-function; that is, _he must fulfil his duty towards
life completely, so that he may in every respect be a vitally living
member of human society_. Anything that he neglects in this respect
descends into the unconscious and reinforces its position, so that he
is in danger of being swallowed up by it, if his ego-function is not
established. Severe penalties are attached to that. As indicated by old
Synesius, the "spiritualised soul (pneumatike psyché) becomes god and
demon, a state in which it suffers the divine penalties," that is, it
suffers being torn asunder by the Zagreus, an experience which Nietzsche
also underwent at the beginning of his insanity, where, in "Ecce Homo,"
the God whom he was despairingly resisting in front assailed him from
behind. Enantiodromia is the being torn asunder into the pairs of
opposites, which opposites are only proper to "the god," and therefore
also to the deified man, who owes likeness to God to his having
prevailed over his gods.


VI.--THE SYNTHETIC OR CONSTRUCTIVE METHOD

We now reach the fifth stage of progressive understanding. The coming
to terms with the unconscious is a technical performance to which
the name of _transcendental function_ has been given because a new
function is produced, which being based upon both real and imaginary,
or rational and irrational data, makes a bridge between the rational
and irrational functions of the psyche. The basis of the transcendental
function is a _new method of treating psychological materials_ such as
dreams and phantasies. The theories previously discussed were based upon
an exclusively causal-reductive procedure, which reduces the dream or
phantasy to its component reminiscences, and the instinctive processes
that underlie them. I have already stated the justification as well as
the limitations of this proceeding. It reaches the end of its usefulness
at the moment when the dream symbols no longer permit of a reduction
to personal reminiscences or aspirations; that is when the images
of the absolute unconscious begin to be produced. It would be quite
inappropriate to reduce these collective ideas to what is personal,
and not only inappropriate but even actually pernicious, a fact that
has been impressed upon me by disagreeable experiences. The values of
the images or symbols of the absolute unconscious are only disclosed if
they are subjected to a synthetic (not analytical) treatment. Just as
analysis (the causally reductive procedure) disintegrates the symbol
into its components, so the synthetic procedure synthesises the symbol
into a universal and comprehensible expression. The synthetic procedure
is by no means easy; I will therefore give an example, by means of which
I can explain the whole process.

A patient had the following dream. She was just at the critical juncture
between the analysis of the personal unconscious and the commencement
of the production of the absolute unconscious. "_I am on the point of
crossing a broad and rapid stream. There is no bridge, but I find a ford
where I can cross. As I am just on the point of doing so, a big crab
that lay hidden in the water seizes my foot and does not let it go._"
She awoke in fear. Associations with the dream were as follows:--

1. _Stream._--It forms a boundary that is difficult to cross. I must
surmount an obstacle; I suppose it refers to the fact that I am getting
on very slowly; I suppose I ought to reach the other side.

2. _Ford._--An opportunity for getting safely across, a possible
way; otherwise the stream would be too difficult. The possibility of
surmounting the obstacle lies in the analytical treatment.

3. _Crab._--The crab lay quite hidden in the water; I did not see it at
first. Cancer is a fearful incurable illness. (A series of recollections
of Mrs. X., who died of cancer, followed.) I am afraid of this illness.
A crab[242] is an animal that walks backwards; obviously it wants to
pull me down into the stream. It clutched me in a gruesome way, and
I was awfully afraid. What prevents my getting across? Oh yes, I had
another great scene with my friend.

It must be explained that there is something special about this
friendship. We have here an ardent attachment, bordering on the
homosexual. It has been going on for years. The friend is in many
respects like the patient, and is also nervous. They have pronounced
artistic interests in common. But the patient is the stronger
personality of the two. They are both nervous, and their mutual relation
being too engrossing, cuts them off too much from other possibilities of
life. In spite of an "ideal friendship" they have at times tremendous
scenes, owing to their mutual irritability. Evidently the unconscious
wishes to put some distance between them, but they refuse to pay
attention to it. A "scene" usually begins by one of them finding that
she does not yet understand the other well enough, and that they
ought to talk more openly together; whereupon both make enthusiastic
endeavours to talk things out. Misunderstandings supervene almost
directly, provoking fresh scenes, each worse than the last. The quarrel
was in its way and _faute de mieux_ a pleasure to both of them, which
they were unwilling to relinquish. My patient, especially, was unable
for a very long time to renounce the sweet pain of not being understood
by her best friend, although, as she said, every scene "tired her to
death." She had long since realised that this friendship had become
superfluous, and that it was only from mistaken ambition that she clung
to the belief that she could yet make something ideal out of it. The
patient had formerly had an extravagant, fantastic relation to her
mother, and after her mother's death had transferred her feelings to her
friend.


VII.--ANALYTICAL (CAUSAL-REDUCTIVE) INTERPRETATION.[243]

This interpretation may be summed up in a sentence: "I understand
that I ought to get to the other side of the stream (that is, give up
the relation with the friend), but I would much rather that my friend
did not let me out of her claws (embrace)." That is, expressed as an
_infantile wish_: Mother would like to attract me to herself again
by the well-known mode of enthusiastic embraces. The incompatibility
of the wish lies in the strong under-current of _homosexuality_, the
existence of which had been abundantly proved by obvious facts. The
crab seizes her foot. The patient having big, "manly" feet, she plays
a masculine part towards her friend, having also corresponding sexual
fantasies. The foot is known to have phallic significance. (Detailed
evidence of this is to be found in _Aigremont's_ writings.) The complete
interpretation would run as follows: The reason why she will not let
her friend go is because her unconscious homosexual wishes are set upon
her. As these wishes are morally and æsthetically incompatible with the
tendency of the conscious personality, they are repressed, and therefore
unconscious. The fear is an expression of this repressed wish.

This interpretation is exceedingly depreciative of the patient's
high-pitched conscious ideal of friendship. It is true at this point
in analysis she would no longer have taken this interpretation amiss.
Some time before certain facts had sufficiently convinced her of her
homosexual tendency, so that she was able to acknowledge the existence
of this inclination frankly, although it was of course painful for her
to do so. Therefore if, at this stage of the treatment, I had informed
her that this was the interpretation, I should not have encountered
resistances from her. She had already overcome the painfulness of this
unwelcome tendency by understanding it. But she would have said to me:
"Why do we analyse this dream at all? It is only repeating what I have
now known for a long while." It is true this interpretation does not
reveal anything new to the patient, and it is therefore uninteresting
and ineffective. This kind of interpretation would at the beginning of
the treatment have been impossible in this case, because the patient's
prudishness would under no circumstances have acknowledged it. The
"venom" of understanding had to be instilled very carefully, and in the
smallest of doses, until the patient gradually became more enlightened.
But when the analytical or causal-reductive interpretation, instead
of furnishing something new, persistently brings the same material in
different variations, then the moment has come when another mode of
interpretation is called for. The causal-reductive procedure has certain
drawbacks. First, it does not take strictly into account the patient's
associations--_e.g._ in this case the association of the illness
("cancer") with "crab" (Krebs = cancer). Second, the particular choice
of symbol remains obscure. For instance, why does the friend-mother
appear as a crab? A prettier and more plastic representation would have
been a nymph. ("Half dragged she him, half sank he down,"[244] etc.)
An octopus, a dragon, a serpent, or a fish could have performed the
same services. Third, the causal-reductive procedure completely ignores
that a dream is a subjective phenomenon, and that consequently even an
exhaustive interpretation can never connect the crab with the mother or
the friend, but only with the dreamer's idea of them. The whole dream
is the dreamer; she is the stream, the crossing, and the crab. That is
to say these details are expressions of psychological conditions and
tendencies in the subject's unconscious.

I have therefore introduced the following terminology. I call
interpretations in which the dream symbols are treated as
representations of the real objects _interpretation upon the objective
plane_. The opposite interpretation is that which connects every
fragment of the dream (_e.g._ all the persons who do anything) with the
dreamer himself. This is _interpretation upon the subjective plane_.
Objective interpretation is _analytical_, because it dissects the dream
contents into complexes of reminiscence, and finds their relation to
real conditions. Subjective interpretation is _synthetic_, because it
detaches the fundamental underlying complexes of reminiscence from their
actual causes, regarding them as tendencies or parts of the subject, and
reintegrating them with the subject. (In experiencing something I do not
merely experience the object, but in the first place myself, although
this is only the case if I render myself account of the experience.)

The synthetic or constructive procedure of interpretation[245] is
therefore based upon the version on the subjective plane.


VIII.--THE SYNTHETIC (CONSTRUCTIVE) INTERPRETATION.

The patient is unconscious of the fact that it is in herself that the
obstacle lies which should be overcome, the boundary that is difficult
to cross which impedes further progress. But it is possible to cross
the boundary. It is true that just here a peculiar and unexpected peril
threatens, namely, something "animal" (non-human or super-human) which
moves backwards and goes into the depths of the stream, wanting to draw
down the dreamer as a whole personality. This danger is, moreover,
like the deadly disease of cancer, which begins secretly somewhere,
and is incurable (overpowering). The patient imagines that her friend
hinders her, pulling her down. So long as this is her belief she must
perforce influence her friend, "draw her up," teach, improve, educate
her, and make futile and impractically idealistic efforts in order to
avoid being dragged down herself. Of course, the friend makes similar
endeavours, being in a like case with the patient. So both of them keep
jumping upon each other like fighting cocks, each trying to fly over
the other's head. The higher the point to which the one screws herself,
the higher must the other also try to get. Why? Because each thinks the
fault lies in the other, in the object. Interpretation of the dream on
the subjective plane brings deliverance from this absurdity, for it
shows the patient that she has something in herself that is hindering
her from crossing the boundary; that is, from getting out of the one
position or attitude into another. To interpret change of place as
change of attitude is supported by the mode of expression in certain
primitive languages, where, _e.g._, the phrase "I am on the point of
going," is "I am at the place of going." In order to understand the
language of dreams, we need plenty of parallels from the psychology of
primitive peoples, as well as from historical symbolism. This is so
because dreams originate in the unconscious, which contains the residual
potentialities of function of all preceding epochs of the history of the
evolution of man.

Obviously, in our interpretation everything now depends upon
understanding what is meant by the crab. We know that it symbolizes
something that comes to light in the friend (she connects the crab
with the friend), and also something that came to light in the mother.
Whether both mother and friend really have this quality in them is
irrelevant as regards the patient. The situation will only be changed
when the patient herself has changed. Nothing can be changed in the
mother because she is dead. The friend cannot be urged to alter; if
she wants to alter herself, that is her own affair. The fact that
the quality in question is associated with the mother indicates that
it is something infantile. What is there in common in the patient's
relation both to her mother and her friend? What is common to both is
a violently extravagant demand for love, the patient feeling herself
overwhelmed by its passion. This claim is an overpowering infantile
craving which is characteristically blind. What is in question here is
a part of her libido that has not been educated, differentiated, nor
humanized, retaining still the compulsive character of an instinct,
because it has not yet been tamed by domestication. An _animal_ is a
perfectly appropriate symbol for this rôle of libido. But why is the
animal a crab in this particular instance? The patient associates cancer
with it, of which disease Mrs. X. died at the age the patient has just
reached. It may, therefore, well be that this is an allusion to an
identification with Mrs. X. We must therefore make inquiries about this
Mrs. X. The patient relates the following facts about her: Mrs. X. was
widowed early; she was very cheerful and enjoyed life. She had a number
of adventures with men, especially with one particular man, a gifted
artist, who the patient herself knew personally and who always impressed
her as very fascinating and weird.

An identification can only result from an unrecognized unconscious
resemblance. Now what is the resemblance between our patient and
Mrs. X.? I was able here to remind the patient of a series of former
fantasies and dreams, which had shown plainly that she also had a
frivolous vein in her, although anxiously repressing it, because she
vaguely feared it might seduce her to an immoral life. We have now
gained a further essential contribution for a right understanding of the
"animal" rôle, which evidently represents an untamed, instinctive greed,
which in this case is directed to men. At the same time we understand
a further reason why she cannot let go of her friend. She must cling
to her in order not to fall a prey to this other tendency, which seems
so much more dangerous. By these means she remains at an infantile
homosexual stage, which serves her as a defence. (Experience proves this
erection of defences to be one of the most effective motives for the
retention of unadapted, infantile relations.) But in this missing libido
in the animal rôle lies her well-being, the germ of her future healthy
personality, which does not shrink from the hazards of human life.

But the patient had drawn another conclusion from the fate of Mrs. X.,
having conceived her severe illness and early death as a punishment
of fate for her gay life which the patient, although certainly not
confessing to this feeling, always envied her. When Mrs. X. died, the
patient pulled a long face, beneath which a "human, all too human,"
malicious satisfaction was hidden. As a punishment for this tendency
the patient, taking Mrs. X.'s example as a warning, deterred herself
from living and from further development, and burdened herself with the
misery of this unsatisfying friendship. Of course this concatenation
had not been consciously clear to her, otherwise she would never have
acted as she had done. The truth of this conclusion can be proved by the
material.

The history of this identification by no means ends here. The patient
subsequently emphasized the fact that Mrs. X. had a not inconsiderable
artistic capacity which developed only after her husband's death and
which led to her friendship with the artist. This fact seems to be
one of the essential incentives to the identification, if we call to
mind that the patient had already told us what a striking impression
she had received from the artist. A fascination of this kind is
never exclusively exercised by one person only upon the other. It is
a phenomenon of reciprocal relation between two persons in so far as
the fascinated person must provide a suitable predisposition. But
she must be unconscious of this predisposition, otherwise there will
be no fascination. Fascination is a phenomenon of compulsion which
lacks conscious ground; that is, it is not a process of the will, but
a phenomenon coming to the surface from the unconscious, and forcing
itself compulsorily upon consciousness. All compulsions arise from
unconscious motives. It must therefore be assumed that the patient
possesses a similar unconscious predisposition to that of the artist.
She becomes identified with this artist, and is also identified with him
_as man_. Here we are at once reminded of the analysis of the dream,
where we met an allusion to the "masculine" foot. As a matter of fact,
the patient plays a thoroughly masculine part towards her friend, being
the active one who continually takes the lead, commanding her friend and
occasionally even forcing her somewhat violently to some course that
only the patient desires. Her friend is distinctly feminine both in her
external appearance and otherwise, whilst the patient is also externally
of a somewhat masculine type. Her voice is stronger and deeper than
that of her friend. She now describes Mrs. X. as a very feminine woman,
her gentleness and amiability being comparable to that of her friend,
so she thinks. This gives us a new clue. The patient is obviously
playing towards her friend the artist's part towards Mrs. X. Thus she
unconsciously completes her identification with Mrs. X. and her lover.
In this way she is giving expression to her frivolous vein which she had
repressed so carefully. She is not living it consciously, however, but
is herself played upon by her own unconscious tendency.

We now know a great deal about the crab: it represents the inner
psychology of this untamed part of the libido. The unconscious
identifications always keep drawing her on. They have this power because
being unconscious they cannot be subjected to insight and correction.
The crab is the symbol of the unconscious contents. These contents are
always seducing the patient to retain her relation to the friend. (The
"crab goes backwards.") But the relation to the friend is synonymous
with illness, she became nervous through it (hence the association of
illness).

Strictly speaking, this really belongs to the analysis on the objective
plane. But we must not forget that we only arrive at understanding by
applying the _subjective_ interpretation, which thereby proves itself
to be an important heuristic principle. For practical purposes we might
rest quite satisfied with the result we have already reached. But we
seek here to satisfy all the requirements of the theory. Not all the
associations have yet been used; neither is the significance of the
choice of symbols yet demonstrated sufficiently.

We will now recur to the patient's remark that the crab lay hidden
under the water in the stream, and that she had not seen it at first.
She had not at first perceived the unconscious relations that have
just been elucidated; they lay hidden in the water. But the stream is
the obstacle preventing her from going across. It is precisely the
unconscious relations binding her to her friend that have been hindering
her. The unconscious was the obstacle. In this case, therefore, the
water signifies the unconscious, or, it were better to say, the
_being unconscious_ the being hidden, for the crab is also something
unconscious, namely, the portion of the libido that was hidden in the
unconscious.


IX.--THE DOMINANTS OF THE SUPER-PERSONAL UNCONSCIOUS.

The task now lies before us of raising the unconscious data and their
relations that have been hitherto understood upon the objective plane,
to the _subjective_ plane. To this end we must once more separate them
from their objects, conceiving them as images, related in a subjective
way to function-complexes in the patient's own unconscious. Raised to
the subjective plane, Mrs. X. is the person who showed the patient the
way to do something that the patient herself feared while unconsciously
desiring it. Mrs. X. therefore represents that which the patient would
like to become, and yet does not quite want to. In a certain sense Mrs.
X. is a picture of the patient's future character. The fascinating
artist cannot be raised to the subjective plane, because the unconscious
artistic gift lying dormant in the patient has already been covered over
by Mrs. X. It would be quite right to say that the artist is the image
of the masculine element in the patient, which not being consciously
realised, is still lying in the unconscious. In a certain sense this
is indeed true, the patient actually deluding herself as regards this
matter. That is, she seems to herself to be particularly tender,
sensitive and feminine, with nothing in the least masculine about her.
She was indignantly amazed when I drew her attention to her masculine
traits. But the reason why she is fascinated by something mysterious in
the artist cannot be attributed to what is masculine in her. That seems
to be completely unknown to her. And yet it must be hiding somewhere,
for she has produced this feeling out of herself.

Whenever a part of libido similar to this cannot be found, experience
teaches us that it has always been _projected_. But into whom? Is it
still attached to the artist? He has long ago disappeared from her
horizon, and can hardly have taken the projection with him, because it
was firmly fixed in the patient's unconscious. A similar projection is
always actually present, that is, there must somewhere be some one upon
whom this amount of libido is actually projected, otherwise she would
have felt it consciously.

Thus we once more reach the objective plane, for we cannot discover
this missing projection in any other way. The patient does not know any
man except myself who means anything at all to her, and as her doctor I
mean a good deal to her. Therefore she has probably projected this part
upon me. It is true I had never noticed anything of the kind. But the
exquisitely deceptive rôles are never presented to the analyst on the
surface, coming to light always only outside the hour of treatment. I
therefore carefully inquire: "Tell me what do I seem like to you when
you are not with me? Am I just the same then?" Reply: "When I am with
you, you are very pleasant and kind; but when I am alone, or have not
seen you for rather a long time, then the picture I have in my mind of
you changes in an extraordinary way. Sometimes you seem quite idealized,
and then again different." She hesitates; I help by saying: "Yes, what
am I like then?" Reply: "Sometimes quite dangerous, sinister like an
evil magician or demon. I do not know how I get hold of such ideas. You
are not really a bit like that."

So this part was attached to me as part of a transference; that is
why it was lacking in her inventory. Therewith we recognize a further
important thing. I was confused with (identified with) the artist, and
in her unconscious fantasy she is Mrs. X. I was easily able to prove
this fact by means of material that had previously been brought to
light (sexual fantasies). But I myself then am the obstacle, the crab,
that is hindering her from getting across. The state of affairs would
be critical if at this particular point we were to limit ourselves to
the objective plane of interpretation. What would be the use of my
explaining: "But I am not this artist at all, I am not in the least
weird as he is, nor am I like an evil magician." That would leave the
patient quite unconvinced because she would know as well I do that the
projection would continue to exist all the same, and that it is really
I who am hindering her further progress. It is at this point that many
a treatment has come to a standstill. For there is no other way for
the patient here of escaping from the embrace of the unconscious, but
for the physician to raise himself to the subjective plane, where he
is to be regarded as an image. But an image of what? This is where the
greatest difficulty lies. The doctor will say: "An image of something
in the patient's unconscious." But the patient may object: "What, am
I to suppose myself to be a man, a mysteriously fascinating one to
boot, a wicked wizard and a demon? No, I cannot accept that; it is
nonsense. I'd sooner believe that you are all that." She is really, so
to speak, quite right. It is too preposterous to want to transfer such
things to herself. She cannot permit herself to be made into a demon,
any more than can the physician. Her eyes flash, a wicked expression
appears upon her face, a glimmer of an unknown hate never seen before,
something snake-like seeming to creep into her. I am suddenly faced
by the possibility of a fatal misunderstanding with her. What is it?
Is it disappointed love? Is she offended? Does she feel depreciated?
There seems to lurk something of the beast of prey, something really
demoniac in her glance. Is she then after all a demon? Or am I myself
the beast of prey, the demon, and is this a terrified victim sitting
before me, who is trying to defend herself with the brute force of
despair against my wicked spells? But either idea must be nonsense,
phantastical delusion. What have I come in contact with? What new string
is vibrating? But it is only for a passing moment. The expression upon
the patient's face becoming quiet again, she says, as if relieved: "It
is extraordinary. I feel as if you had touched the point which I could
never get over in relation to my friend. It is a horrible feeling,
something non-human, wicked, and cruel. I cannot describe how queer this
feeling is. At such moments it makes me hate and despise my friend,
although I struggle against it with all my might and main."

An explanatory light is thrown upon what has happened by this
observation. I have now taken the friend's place. The friendship has
been overcome, the ice of repression is broken. The patient has without
knowing it entered upon a new phase of her existence. I know that now
upon me will fall everything painful and bad in the relation to the
friend. So also will whatever was good in it, although in violent
conflict with the mysterious unknown quantity X, about which the patient
could never get clear. A new phase, therefore, of the transference
supervenes, which, however, does not as yet make clearly apparent what
the X that is projected upon me consists of.

It is quite certain, that the most troublesome misunderstandings
threaten if the patient should stick at this stage of the transference.
In that case she will necessarily treat me as she treated her friend;
that is the X will continually be somewhere in the air giving rise to
misunderstandings. The end would probably be that she would see the evil
demon in me, because she is quite unable to accept the fact that she
is herself the demon. All insoluble conflicts are brought about in this
way. And an insoluble conflict signifies a standstill in life.

Another possibility is, that the patient should disregard the obscure
point by applying her old preventative against this new difficulty. That
is, she would repress it again, instead of keeping it conscious, which
is the necessary and obvious demand of the whole method. Nothing is
gained by such repression; on the contrary, the X threatens more from
the unconscious where it is considerably more unpleasant.

Whenever such an unacceptable image emerges, one must decide whether
at bottom it is destined to represent a human quality or not.
"Magician" and "demon" may represent qualities that are described in
this particular fashion, in order that they may speedily be recognized
as _not human but mythological qualities_. Magician and demon being
mythological figures aptly express the unknown "non-human" feelings
which had surprised the patient. These attributes are not applicable
to a human personality; being as a rule judgments of character
_intuitively_ and not critically approved, which are projected upon our
fellow-beings, inevitably doing serious injury to human relations.

_Such attributes always indicate that contents of the super-personal or
absolute unconscious are being projected._ Neither demons nor wicked
magicians are reminiscences of personal experiences, although every one
has, of course, at some time or other heard or read of them. Although
one has heard of a rattle-snake, it would hardly be appropriate to
describe a lizard or a blind-worm as a rattle-snake, simply because
one was startled by their rustling. Similarly, one would hardly term
a fellow-being a demon, unless some kind of demoniacal influence were
closely associated with him. If, however, the demoniacal influence were
really part of his personal character, it would show itself everywhere,
and then this human being would be a demon, a kind of werwolf. But such
an ascription is mythology; in other words, it is from the collective
and not from the individual psyche. Inasmuch as through our unconscious
we have a share in the historical collective psyche, we naturally
dwell unconsciously in a world of werwolves, demons, magicians, etc.,
these being things which have always affected man most profoundly. We
have just as much a part in gods and devils, saviours and criminals.
But it would be absurd to want to ascribe to one's personal self the
possibilities that are potentially existing in the human unconscious.
It is, therefore, essential to make as clear a distinction as possible
between the personal and the impersonal assets of our psyche. This is
by no means intended to nullify the occasional great effects due to
the existence of the contents of the absolute unconscious; but these
contents of the collective psyche should be differentiated from those
belonging to the individual psyche. For simple-minded people, of course,
these things were never separated, the projection of gods, demons, etc.,
not having been understood as a psychological function were simply
accounted concretistical realities. Their projectional character was
never perceived. It was only with the advent of the epoch of scepticism
that it was realized that the gods did not really exist except as
projections. With that the matter was set at rest. But the psychological
function corresponding to it was by no means set at rest, for it lapsed
into the unconscious and began to poison men with a surplus of libido
that had hitherto been invested in the cult of idols or gods. Obviously,
the depreciation and repression of such a powerful function as that of
religion has serious consequences for the psychology of the individual.
The reflux of this libido strengthens the unconscious prodigiously,
so that it begins to exercise a powerful compulsory influence upon
consciousness and its archaic collective contents. One period of
scepticism came to a close with the horrors of the French Revolution.
At the present time we are again experiencing an ebullition of the
unconscious destructive powers of the collective psyche. The result is
an unparalleled general slaughter. That is just what the unconscious
was tending towards. This tendency had previously been inordinately
strengthened by the rationalism of modern life, which by depreciating
everything irrational, caused the function of irrationalism to sink into
the unconscious. But the function once in the unconscious will from
thence work unceasing havoc, like an incurable disease whose centre
cannot be eradicated. For then the individual and the nation alike are
compelled to live irrationally, and even to apply their highest idealism
and their best wit to make this madness of irrationalism as complete as
possible. We see examples of this on a small scale in our patient. She
turned from a possibility of life that seemed to her irrational (Mrs.
X.) in order to live it in a pathological form, to her own loss, and
with an unsuitable object.

There is, indeed, no possible alternative but to acknowledge
irrationalism as a psychological function that is necessary and always
existent. Its results are not to be taken as concrete realities (that
would involve repression), but as _psychological realities_. They
are realities because they are _effective_ things, that is, they are
_actualities_.

The collective unconscious is the sediment of all the experience of the
universe of all time, and is also an image of the universe that has
been in process of formation for untold ages. In the course of time
certain features have become prominent in this image, the so-called
_dominants_. These dominants are the ruling powers, the gods; that is,
the representations resulting from dominating laws and principles, from
average regularities in the issue of the images that the brain has
received as a consequence of secular processes.

In so far as the images formed in the brain are relatively faithful
portrayals of psychic happenings they will correspond to their
dominants; that is, their general characteristic features, made
prominent by the accumulation of similar experiences, will correspond
to certain physical fundamental facts that are also universal. Hence it
is possible to transfer unconscious images to physical events direct as
intuitive ideas; _e.g. ether_ the primeval breath or soul-substance
appears in man's conceptions the whole world over; so, too, _energy_,
the magic force, which is equally widespread.

On account of their connection with physical things the dominants
usually make their appearance as projections, appearing,
indeed--if the projections are unconscious--in the persons of the
immediate environment, as a rule in the form of abnormal under- or
over-valuations, which excite misunderstandings, conflict, infatuations,
and various kinds of folly. People say: "He makes a god of So-and-so,"
or "So-and-so is X.'s _bête noire_." They also give rise to the
formation of modern myths, that is, fantastic rumours, suspicions and
prejudices.

The dominants of the collective unconscious are therefore extremely
important things of significant effect, to which great attention should
be paid. They must not be repressed, but must be given most careful
consideration. They usually appear as projections, and since projections
are only attached where there is some external stimulus, it is very
difficult to appraise them aright, on account of the relation of the
unconscious images with the object. If some one projects the dominant
of "devil" into a fellow-being, this occurs because this other person
has something in him that makes the attachment of the devil dominant
possible. But that is by no means to say that this person is therefore,
so to speak, a devil; on the contrary, he may be a particularly good
fellow, but being antipathetic to the one who projects, a "devilish
effect" is brought about between the two. This does not mean that the
one who projects is a devil, although he must recognize that he too,
just as much, has something devilish in him, and has been gulled by
it, inasmuch as he projected it; but that does not make him a devil;
indeed, he may be just as decent a man as the other. In such a case the
appearance of the devil dominant means: the two persons are incompatible
(for the moment and for the near future), wherefore the unconscious
splits them asunder and holds them apart from each other.

One of the dominants that is almost always met in the analysis of
projections of collective unconscious contents is the "magical demon;"
it is of preponderating sinister effect. "The Golem," by _Meyrink_,
is a good example of this; also the Thibetan wizard in Meyrink's
"Fledermäusen," who lets the world-war loose by magic. Obviously Meyrink
formed this image independently and freely out of his unconscious,
by giving word and picture to a feeling similar to the one that my
patient had projected upon me. The dominant of magic also appears in
"Zarathustra," whilst in "Faust" it is, so to say, the hero himself.

The picture of this demon is the lowest and most elementary concept
of God. It is the dominant of the primitive tribal magic-man, or a
singularly gifted personality endowed with magic power. This figure
very frequently makes an appearance in my patient's unconscious as a
_dark-skinned being of Mongolian type_.

An important step forward has been taken by the recognition of the
dominants of the absolute unconscious. The magical or demoniac effect
of the fellow-being is made to disappear by the feeling being realised
as a definite projection of the absolute unconscious. On the other
hand, a completely new and unsuspected task now lies before us: namely,
the question in what way the ego should come to terms with this
psychological non-ego. Should one rest satisfied with having verified
the effective existence of unconscious dominants, leaving the matter to
take care of itself?

To leave it at this point would be the means of creating a permanent
state of dissociation in the subject, a conflict between the individual
psyche and the collective psyche. Upon the one side we should have the
differentiated modern ego, whilst upon the other a kind of uncivilized
negro representative of a thoroughly primitive state. That would mean
that we should have what really does exist, a crust of civilization over
a dark-skinned brute; the cleavage would be distinct and demonstrable
before our very eyes. But such a dissociation requires immediate
synthesis and cultivation of what is undeveloped. There must be a union
of these two aspects.

Before entering upon this new question let us first return to the
dream from which we started. The discussion has given us a broader
understanding of the dream, and especially of an essential part of it,
namely, the fear. This fear is a demoniac fear of the dominants of the
collective unconscious. We saw that the patient identifies herself
with Mrs. X., expressing thereby that she also has some relation to
the mysterious artist. It was apparent also that she identified the
physician (myself) with the artist; and further that when taken upon the
subjective plane, the image of the wizard dominants of the collective
unconscious represented me.

All this is covered in the dream by the symbol of the crab which walks
backwards. The crab stands for the living content of the unconscious
that can by no means be exhausted or rendered inoperative by analysis
on the objective plane. But what we were able to do was to _detach the
mythological or collective psychological contents from the objects
of consciousness, and to consolidate them as psychological realities
outside the individual psyche_.

So long as the absolute unconscious and the individual psyche are
coupled together without differentiation, no progress can be made,
or, as the dream expresses it, no boundary be crossed. If the dreamer
does nevertheless prepare to cross the boundary, the unconscious that
was hitherto unnoticed becomes animated, seizing her and dragging her
down. The dream and its material characterize the absolute unconscious,
on the one side as a lower animal living hidden in the depths of the
water; and on the other side, as a dangerous disease that can only be
cured by a timely operation. To what extent this characterization is
appropriate has already been seen. As was pointed out, the animal symbol
specially refers to what is _extra_ human, that is super-personal; for
the contents of the absolute unconscious are not merely the residue of
archaic human functions, but also the residue of functions of the animal
ancestry of mankind, whose duration of life was indeed vastly greater
than the relatively brief epoch of specifically human existence. If such
residues are active, they are apt, as nothing else is, not merely to
arrest the progress of development, but also to divert the libido into
regressive channels, until the quantity which the absolute unconscious
has activated has been absorbed. The energy becomes profitable again
after it has been consciously contrasted with the absolute unconscious,
a process which enables it to be converted into a valuable source from
which to draw. This transference of energy was established by religions
in a concretistic manner through cultural communication with the gods
(the dominants of the absolute unconscious). But these modes and customs
are too much at variance with our intellect and our moral sense for us
to be able to declare this solution of the problem as still binding,
or even possible. If, on the other hand, we apprehend the images of
the unconscious as collective unconscious dominants, therefore as
collective-psychological phenomena or functions, this hypothesis is
in no way opposed to our intellect and conscience. This solution is
rationally acceptable. We have thus gained the possibility of coming to
terms with the activated residues of our ancestral history. This mode
of settlement makes it possible to traverse the boundary line hitherto
limiting us, and is therefore appropriately termed the _transcendental
function_, which is synonymous with progressive development to a new
attitude. In the dream this development is indicated by the other side
of the stream.

The similarity to hero-myths is striking. The typical combat of the hero
with the monster (the unconscious content) frequently takes place on the
banks of some water; sometimes at a ford. This circumstance is prominent
in legends of Red Indians, as, for example, in Longfellow's "Hiawatha."
In the decisive battle the hero is swallowed by a monster (_cf._ story
of Jonah), as Frobenius[246] has shown by means of extensive material.
But inside the monster the hero begins to come to terms with the beast
in his own way: whilst the creature swims with him towards the sunrise,
he cuts off a valuable piece of the viscera, _e.g._ the heart, by which
the monster lived, that is, the valuable energy by which the unconscious
was activated. Through this deed he kills the monster, who then drifts
to land, where the hero, born anew through the transcendental function
(the "night-journey under the sea" of Frobenius), steps forth, often in
company with all those beings whom the monster had previously swallowed.
This enables the normal state to be restored, as the unconscious having
been robbed of its energy no longer occupies a preponderating position.
In this way the myth--which is the dream of a people--graphically
describes the problem with which our patient is concerned.[247]

The problem of how to come to terms with the absolute unconscious is a
question apart. I must content myself here with a general survey of the
new theory of the unconscious up to the transcendental function, leaving
the presentation of the transcendental function itself to a later work.


X.--THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE TYPES OF INTROVERSION AND EXTROVERSION IN THE
ANALYTICAL PROCESS.

The description of the analysis of the unconscious would be incomplete
if a word were not said about the question whether this method is
equally applicable to the two types. As a matter of fact, both the
development and the conception of the unconscious are different for
each type. Although making every effort to find out a formulation that
shall be as universally valid as possible, we must emphatically impress
upon our minds the fact that the two modes of conception of the types
are essentially different; a universal formulation that is just, only
becomes possible when both standpoints are given equal consideration.
I do not conceal from myself the fact that this subject is of less
interest to the layman than to the specialist. Nevertheless, certain
aspects of the question are of such a general character that the layman
should not find the perusal of this last section entirely without
interest.

Let us first consider the concept of the unconscious. I have here
introduced the unconscious under the conception of a psychological
function, namely, the function of the sum of all those psychic contents
which do not reach the threshold of consciousness. I have divided
the unconscious materials into _personal_--that is to reminiscences
attributable to personal experiences, combinations and tendencies--and
into _impersonal_ collective contents, that is, those whose contents
cannot be attributed to personal experiences.

The contents of the psyche are fundamentally images indicating function
on the one hand, and upon the other objects and the world generally. The
conscious contains the recent object-images; the personal unconscious,
the object-images of the individual past, so far as they have either
been forgotten or repressed; whilst the absolute or collective
unconscious contains the inherited world-images generally, under the
form of primordial images or mythical themes. All psychic images have
two sides: the one, being directed towards the object, is as faithful
a likeness of the object as possible, framed without any intention or
obligation to be anything else. The other side is directed towards the
soul, that is towards the psychic function and the laws peculiar to it.

Let us take as an example, a primordial image out of a hero-myth. There
is in the West a demon ancestress with a large mouth. The hero creeps
into it, and at the same moment a certain little bird sings; the ancient
dame shuts her mouth with a bang, and the hero disappears.

The side of the image directed towards the physical object means, the
sun goes down in the evening into the mouth of the ocean. At this hour
a certain little bird sings (which is an objective fact), and the sun
disappears into the depths of the sea.

The side of the image directed towards the soul, that is the _idea_,
signifies: The energy contained in consciousness disappears (like the
sun in the evening) into the monster of the unconscious.

If we consider the collective-unconscious from the side of the
soul or idea, it is something entirely distinct, and it must be
differentiated, _abstracted_ from the object, if its contents are to
attain the perfection of an idea. If, on the other hand, we consider the
collective-unconscious from the side of the physical object, that is
as an image of the object, it is weaker and less clear than the object
itself, and can only be brought to perfection if it is objectified, that
is projected on to the object itself.

As previously explained, there are two types of human psychology that
can be clearly distinguished, viz. introversion and extroversion. The
introvert is characterised by the thought standpoint; the extrovert
by the feeling standpoint. As I showed, they are quite different in
their relation to the object: the introvert abstracting from the
object and thinking about it, whilst the extrovert goes to the object
and feels himself into it. The accent of value lies upon the ego for
the introvert, but upon the object for the extrovert. The former's
chief concern is the preservation of the ego; that of the latter the
preservation of the object. The two types will adopt a different
attitude towards the unconscious, namely, the introvert will and must
seize the idea-side of the unconscious image; the extrovert, on the
other hand, seizing the side of the physical reflection. The introvert
will purify as far as possible the idea-side from the "alloy" of the
concretistic admixture of the physical image, in order to arrive at the
abstract idea; whilst, on the other hand, the extrovert will purify the
physical image as far as possible from the "phantastic" admixture of the
enveloping ideas. The former, by raising himself to a world of idea,
will endeavour to overcome the disturbing influence of the unconscious;
whilst the latter will approach the object as near as possible and
project the unconscious image into the physical object, thus freeing
himself from the grip of the unconscious.

What for the extrovert is a phantastic and disturbing admixture in the
unconscious picture, is for the introvert precisely that which has the
most value, for it is the germ of the pure idea, and _vice versâ_; what
for the introvert are merely concretistical "imperfections," survivals
of a physical origin, are for the extrovert a most valuable hint, the
bridge by which the unconscious can be united with the object.

This description makes it manifest that the two types go contrary
ways in the course of the development of their unconscious, arriving
therefore at opposite extremes: the one at the idea, the other at the
object of his feeling. The psychological characteristics of the types
are eventually pushed to extremes, where according to the enantiodromic
law the moment has arrived when in each case the "other" function
enters into its fully acknowledged right, that is, feeling in the case
of the introvert, and thought in that of the extrovert. The introvert
attains the lacking function of autonomous feeling by means of a
differentiation and enhancement of his thought; whilst the extrovert,
on the other hand, attains his thinking by the way of an increasingly
differentiated love. These functions that hitherto were secondary are
found at first in the unconscious, gradually reaching consciousness in
the course of development. At first they are unconscious functions in a
state that is more or less incompatible with consciousness and have the
typical qualities of unconscious contents. These qualities are such as
are not tolerated in consciousness. The lunatic Schreber[248] says most
aptly that the language of God (the unconscious) is a somewhat archaic
but vigorous German, of which he gives a few striking examples. As the
contrary function that emerges from the unconscious into consciousness
differs to such an extent from what appears to be acceptable to
consciousness, the necessity arises of a technique for coming to terms
with the contrary function. It is impossible to accept the contrary
function as it stands, as it always drags extraneous qualities and
accompanying circumstances with it from the absolute unconscious.
Through the above-described development the extrovert has acquired an
adaptation to the object that is absolutely real and free from all
phantasies; he will therefore be able to turn his attention towards the
"alloy" which for the introvert was the valuable germ of idea. From this
he will then develop similar ideas to those which the introvert has
already developed. _Vice versâ_, the introvert will now be able to turn
his attention to those materials which before he was obliged to reject,
as being side-tracks on the road to physical reality; that is, he will
carry out the same clearing and winnowing in his feeling-relations, that
the extrovert has already completed.

The development of the contrary function that was hitherto unconscious,
leads to individuation beyond the type, and thereby to a new relation
to the world and mind. The process which begins with the complementation
of the types is the transcendental function, which leads to the new
adaptation by means of the clearing and winnowing of unconscious
feelings and thoughts that have been brought up by the contrary function
that had been neglected.

Following the old maxim: "naturam si sequemur ducem nunquam
aberrabimus," we have obeyed the natural impulse of the thinker to carry
the principle of thought through to its utmost perfection attainable, as
also that of the feeler, of carrying the principle of feeling through
to the end. By these means the salutary extreme was produced, to wit,
the hunger, the desire for the compensatory function. For, by means of
thought, the one is landed in a lifeless ice-cold world of crystalline
ideas; whereas, by means of feeling, the other reaches a limitless
ocean of never ending flood of sentiment. The former will, therefore,
yearn for living warmth of feeling, and the latter for the restrictive
precision and solidity of thought.

An enrichment of the individual is attained by this compensatory
process, giving him greater decision and the possibility of a harmony
that is complete in itself. The assimilation of the contrary function
discloses new inner springs, which guarantee to the individual
considerably greater independence from external conditions. This
acquisition is an indisputable advantage that none would like to
surrender in face of the fact so unavoidably connected with it, that a
new adaptation and orientation of this kind places the individual in
a certain contrast to the great bulk of people who yet have the old
attitude. This contrast is no drawback; it is rather a welcome and
effective spur to life and work, for thereby is created the channel
required by our psychic energy for its development.


XI.--GENERAL REMARKS ON THE THERAPY.

I have still to draw the reader's attention to an important fact.
Throughout the course of this paper, I have seemed to associate the
idea of disturbance or even of peril with the unconscious. But it would
give a false impression if we were only to emphasize the dangerous side
of the unconscious. _The unconscious is a source of danger when the
individual is not at one with it._ If we succeed in establishing the
function or attitude that I call transcendental, the disharmony ceases,
and we are permitted to enjoy the favourable side of the unconscious. In
such case the unconscious vouchsafes us that furtherance and assistance
which bountiful Nature is always ready to give to man in overflowing
abundance. The unconscious possesses possibilities of wisdom that are
completely closed to consciousness, for the unconscious has at its
disposal not only all the psychic contents that are under the threshold
because they had been forgotten or overlooked, but also the wisdom of
the experience of untold ages, deposited in the course of time and lying
potential in the human brain. The unconscious is continually active,
creating combinations of its materials; these serve to indicate the
future path of the individual. It creates prospective combinations just
as our consciousness does, only they are considerably superior to the
conscious combinations both in refinement and extent. The unconscious
may therefore be an unparalleled guide for human beings.

The reader must on no account suppose that the complicated psychological
changes described must all be passed through in every individual case.
In practice the treatment is adjusted according to the therapeutic
result attained. The particular result arrived at may be reached
at any stage of the treatment, quite apart from the seriousness or
duration of the malady. The treatment of a serious case may last a long
time, without the higher phases of the evolution ever being reached,
or needing to be reached. There are comparatively few people who,
after attaining the desired therapeutical result, pursue the further
stages of evolution for the sake of their own development. It is,
therefore, not the seriousness of the case which obliges one to pass
through the whole development. In any case, only those people attain
a higher degree of differentiation who are by nature destined and
called to it, that is, who have both a capacity and tendency towards
the higher differentiation. This is a matter in which people are
extremely different, just as among species of animals there are some
that are stationary and conservative, and others that are evolutionary.
Nature is aristocratic, but not in the sense of having reserved the
possibility of differentiation exclusively for those species that stand
high. Similarly, the possibility of the psychological development of
human beings is not reserved for specially _gifted_ individuals. In
other words: neither special intelligence nor any other talent is
necessary in order to achieve a far-reaching psychological development,
inasmuch as in this development moral qualities step in to supplement
where intellect does not suffice. But it must not be supposed under
any circumstances that the treatment consists in grafting general
formulas and complicated doctrines on to people; this is not so. Each
one can acquire that which he needs, after his own fashion and in his
own language. What I have here presented is only the intellectual
formulation of the subject, founded upon preliminary scientific study of
an empirical as well as a theoretical nature; but this formulation does
not become a subject of discussion in the ordinary practical analytical
work. The brief notes of cases that I have inserted give an approximate
idea of the practical side of analysis.

The reader should realize that our new understanding of psychology
has a side that is entirely practical, and another that is entirely
theoretical. It is not merely a practical method of treatment or
education, but it is also a scientific theory, that is closely related
to other co-ordinated sciences.


CONCLUSION.

In conclusion, I must beg the reader to pardon me for having ventured
to say so many new and abstruse things in such a brief compass. I lay
myself open to adverse criticism, because I conceive it to be the duty
of every one who isolates himself by taking his own path, to tell others
what he has found or discovered, whether it be a refreshing spring for
the thirsty, or a sandy desert of sterile error. The one helps, the
other warns. Not the opinion of any individual contemporary will decide
the truth and error of what has been discovered, but rather future
generations and destiny. There are things that are not yet true to-day,
perhaps we are not yet permitted to recognize them as true, although
they may be true to-morrow. Therefore every pioneer must take his own
path, alone but hopeful, with the open eyes of one who is conscious
of its solitude and of the perils of its dim precipices. Our age is
seeking a new spring of life. I found one and drank of it and the water
tasted good. That is all that I can or want to say. My intention and my
duty to society is fulfilled when I have described, as well as I can,
the way that led me to the spring; the reproaches of those who do not
follow this way have never troubled me, nor ever will. New ideas always
encounter resistance from the old. That always was and always will be
the case; it appertains to the self-regulation of mental progress.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 216: New Edition, 1917. Translated by Miss Dora Hecht.]

[Footnote 217: Bleuler, "Die Psychoanalyse Freuds." _Jahrbuch für
psychoanalytische Forschungen_, vol. II., 1910.]

[Footnote 218: Breuer and Freud, "Selected Papers on Hysteria and other
Psychoneuroses." "Nervous and Mental Disease," Monograph series, No. 4.]

[Footnote 219: Freud, "Sammlung kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre."
Deuticke: Wien.]

[Footnote 220: Freud, "The Interpretation of Dreams," George Allen.]

[Footnote 221: Freud, "Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory."
Monograph Series.]

[Footnote 222: Cp. Breuer and Freud, "Selected Papers on Hysteria."]

[Footnote 223: Breuer and Freud, "Selected Papers on Hysteria and other
Psychoneuroses."]

[Footnote 224: For further particulars of this case see Jung, "The
Theory of Psychoanalysis."]

[Footnote 225: We may still apply to love the saying: "The heaven above,
the heaven below, The sky above, the sky below, All things above,
all things below, Succeed and prosper" (Old Mystic). Mephistopheles
expresses the idea when he describes himself as "Part of that power
which still produceth good, whilst ever scheming ill."]

[Footnote 226: "Love" is used in that larger sense of the word, which
indeed belongs to it by right; it does not mean "mere sexuality."]

[Footnote 227: Compare Jung, "Diagnostiche Associationsstudien."
Leipzig: J. A. Barth. 2 volumes.]

[Footnote 228: The theory of "Complexes" is set out in "Psychology of
Dementia præcox," Jung.]

[Footnote 229: Freud, "The Interpretation of Dreams." James Allen.]

[Footnote 230: The rules of dream-analysis, the laws of the structure
of the dream and its symbolism, form almost a science; this is one of
the most important chapters of the psychology of the unconscious whose
comprehension requires very arduous study.]

[Footnote 231: Compare Jung, "The Psychology of the Unconscious."]

[Footnote 232: Thus spake Zarathustra, p. 40.]

[Footnote 233: The German "Auslebetheorie."]

[Footnote 234: "Ueber den nervösen Charakter."]

[Footnote 235: For a preliminary communication upon the subject see page
287.]

[Footnote 236: "The Philosophy of Values."]

[Footnote 237: "Pragmatism."]

[Footnote 238: "Grosse Männer" ("Great Men").]

[Footnote 239: _Furneaux Jordan_: "Character as seen in Body and
Parentage." London, 1896.]

[Footnote 240: I purposely describe only the two types here. Obviously,
the possibility of the existence of other types is not thereby excluded.
Other possibilities are known to us. I refrain from mentioning them,
with a view to limiting the material.]

[Footnote 241: The _Monist_, vol. xvi. p. 363.]

[Footnote 242: The German name for crab (Krebs) is the same as that for
cancer.]

[Footnote 243: A parallel conception of the two kinds of interpretation
is found in a commendable book by _Silberer_: "Probleme der Mystik und
ihrer Symbolik" ("Problems of Mysticism and their Symbolism").]

[Footnote 244: "Halb zog sie ihn, halb sank er hin," etc.]

[Footnote 245: I have also termed this procedure the "hermeneutic
method." See page 468-9.]

[Footnote 246: "Das Zeitalter des Sonnengottes" ("The Age of the
Sun-god").]

[Footnote 247: I have treated the parallels of hero-myths in great
detail in "The Psychology of the Unconscious."]

[Footnote 248: "Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken" ("Memoirs of a
Neurasthenic Patient").]




CHAPTER XV

THE CONCEPTION OF THE UNCONSCIOUS[249]


I.--THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE PERSONAL AND THE IMPERSONAL UNCONSCIOUS

Since the breach with the Viennese school upon the question of the
fundamental explanatory principle of analysis--that is, the question
if it be sexuality or energy--our concepts have undergone considerable
development. After the prejudice concerning the explanatory basis had
been removed by the acceptance of a purely abstract view of it, the
nature of which was not anticipated, interest was directed to the
concept of the unconscious.

According to Freud's theory the contents of the unconscious are limited
to infantile wish-tendencies, which are repressed on account of the
incompatibility of their character. Repression is a process which
begins in early childhood under the moral influence of environment;
it continues throughout life. These repressions are done away with by
means of analysis, and the repressed wishes are made conscious. That
should theoretically empty the unconscious, and, so to say, do away with
it; but in reality the production of infantile sexual wish-fantasies
continues into old age.

According to this theory, the unconscious contains only those parts of
the personality which might just as well be conscious, and have really
only been repressed by the processes of civilisation. According to Freud
the essential content of the unconscious would therefore be _personal_.
But although, from such a view-point the infantile tendencies of the
unconscious are the more prominent, it would be a mistake to estimate
or define the unconscious from this alone, for it has another side.

Not only must the repressed materials be included in the periphery of
the unconscious, but also all the psychic material that does not reach
the threshold of consciousness. It is impossible to explain all these
materials by the principle of repression, for in that case by the
removal of the repression a phenomenal memory would be acquired, one
that never forgets anything. As a matter of fact repression exists, but
it is a special phenomenon. If a so-called bad memory were only the
consequence of repression, then those persons who have an excellent
memory should have no repression, that is, be incapable of being
neurotic. But experience teaches us that this is not the case. There
are, undoubtedly, cases with abnormally bad memories, where it is clear
that the main cause must be attributed to repression. But such cases are
comparatively rare.

We therefore emphatically say that the unconscious contains all that
part of the psyche that is found under the threshold, including
subliminal sense-perceptions, in addition to the repressed material.
We also know--not only on account of accumulated experience, but also
for theoretical reasons--that the unconscious must contain all the
material that has _not yet_ reached the level of consciousness. These
are the germs of future conscious contents. We have also every reason to
suppose that the unconscious is far from being quiescent, in the sense
that it is inactive, but that it is probably constantly busied with the
formation and re-formation of so-called unconscious phantasies. Only in
pathological cases should this activity be thought of as comparatively
autonomous, for normally it is co-ordinated with consciousness.

It may be assumed that all these contents are of a personal nature in
so far as they are acquisitions of the individual life. As this life
is limited, the number of acquisitions of the unconscious must also be
limited, wherefore an exhaustion of the contents of the unconscious
through analysis might be held to be possible. In other words, by the
analysis of the unconscious the inventory of unconscious contents might
be completed, possibly in the sense that the unconscious cannot produce
anything besides what is already known and accepted in the conscious.
Also, as has already been said, we should have to accept the fact that
the unconscious activity had thereby been paralysed, and that by the
removal of the repression we could stop the conscious contents from
descending into the unconscious. Experience teaches us that is only
possible to a very limited extent. We urge our patients to retain their
hold upon repressed contents that have been brought to consciousness,
and to insert them in their scheme of life. But, as we may daily
convince ourselves, this procedure seems to make no impression upon
the unconscious, inasmuch as it goes on producing apparently the same
phantasies, namely, the so-called infantile-sexual ones, which according
to the earlier theory were based upon personal repressions. If in such
cases analysis be systematically continued, an inventory of incompatible
wish-phantasies is gradually revealed, whose combinations amaze us.
In addition to all the sexual perversions every conceivable kind of
crime is discovered, as well as every conceivable heroic action and
great thought, whose existence in the analysed person no one would have
suspected.

In order to give an example of this, I would like to refer to Maeder's
Schizophrenic patient who called the world his picture-book. He was a
locksmith's apprentice who fell ill very early in life; he had never
been blessed with intellectual gifts. As regards his idea that the world
was his picture-book and that he was turning its pages over when he
looked about in the world, it is just Schopenhauer's world, conceived as
will and representation, expressed in primitive picture-language. This
idea has just as universal a character as Schopenhauer's. The difference
consists in the fact that the patient's notion has stood still at an
embryonic stage in a process of growth, whereas with Schopenhauer
the same idea has been changed from a mere image into an abstraction
expressed in terms that are universally valid.

It would be false to assume that the patient's idea had a personal
character and value. That would be to attribute to him the dignity of a
philosopher. But he alone is a philosopher who raises an image that has
naturally sprung up into an abstract idea, thereby translating it into
terms of universal validity. Schopenhauer's philosophical conception
is his personal value, whereas the notion of the patient has merely
an impersonal value of natural growth, in which personal proprietary
rights can only be acquired by making an abstraction of the images, and
translating them into terms that are universally valid. But it would be
wrong if an exaggerated sense of the value of this achievement led us
to ascribe to the philosopher the merit of having made or conceived the
original image itself. The primordial image has also sprung up naturally
in the philosopher, and is nothing but a part of the universal human
heritage in which, theoretically at least, every one has a share. The
golden apples come from the same tree whether they are gathered by a
locksmith's apprentice or a Schopenhauer.

The recognition of such primordial images obliges me to differentiate
between the contents of the unconscious; a differentiation of another
kind than that between the pre-conscious and unconscious, or between
the subconscious and unconscious. The justification for those
distinctions cannot be discussed here; they have a value of their own
and probably merit to be carried further as affording a point of view.
The differentiation which I propose follows obviously from what has
previously been said, namely, that in the so-called unconscious we must
differentiate a layer which may be termed the _personal unconscious_.
The materials contained in this layer are of a personal kind, inasmuch
as on the one hand they may be characterised as acquisitions of the
individual existence, and on the other as psychological factors which
might just as well be conscious. It is, for instance, comprehensible
that incompatible psychological elements succumb to repression on
the one hand and are therefore unconscious, but on the other hand
there exists the possibility of bringing the repressed contents
into consciousness and keeping them there, once they are known and
recognised. We recognise these materials as personal contents, because
we can prove their effects, their partial appearance, or their origin
to lie in our personal past. They are integral constituents of the
personality, and belong to a complete inventory of the same. They are
constituents whose omission in consciousness implies an inferiority
in one respect or another, not indeed an inferiority bearing the
psychological character of an organic deformity or a natural defect,
but rather the character of a neglect which arouses a moral reaction.
The feeling of moral inferiority always indicates that in the portion
omitted is something that according to the feelings should not be
missing; or in other words, could be conscious if we took sufficient
trouble about it. The sense of moral inferiority is not the result
of a collision with the universal, in a certain sense arbitrary,
moral law, but rather the result of a conflict with the personal ego,
which by reason of the psychic economy demands an adjustment of the
deficiency. Wherever a feeling of inferiority appears, it reveals not
only the presence of a demand for the assimilation of an unconscious
constituent, but also the possibility of such an assimilation. It is,
after all, a person's moral qualities that make him assimilate his
unconscious self and retain it in consciousness, whether he be forced to
it by a recognition of its necessity, or by a painful neurosis. He who
continues to tread this path of the realisation of his unconscious self,
necessarily transposes the content of the personal unconscious into
consciousness, whereby the periphery of the personality is considerably
enlarged.


II--THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE ASSIMILATION OF THE UNCONSCIOUS.

This process of assimilating the unconscious leads to remarkable
results. Some people build up from it an unmistakable, even unpleasantly
increased self-consciousness or self-confidence; they "know everything,"
and are completely aware of everything so far as their unconscious is
concerned. They think themselves accurately informed about everything
that comes up from the unconscious. Others are increasingly oppressed
by the contents of the unconscious, they lose their self-reliance or
their self-consciousness more and more, and come near to a state of
depressed resignation in regard to all the extraordinary things the
unconscious produces. The former undertake in the exuberance of their
self-confidence, a responsibility for their unconscious that goes much
too far, beyond every reasonable possibility; the latter ultimately
decline to accept any responsibility in the depressing recognition of
the powerlessness of the ego confronted by relentless Destiny, working
through the unconscious.

If we give the two types close analytical consideration, we shall
discover that behind the optimistic self-confidence of the former
there is hidden a just as deep, or rather a far deeper, helplessness;
a helplessness to which the conscious optimism acts as an unsuccessful
effort at compensation. Behind the pessimistic resignation of the
latter there is hidden a defiant desire for power, far exceeding in
self-confidence the conscious optimism of the former type.

This condition of the personality may well be expressed by the idea
of "God-Almightiness" (Gottähnlichkeit),[250] to which _Adler_ has
particularly drawn our attention.

When the devil wrote the serpent's words in the student's album, _Eritis
sicut Deus scientes bonum et malum_, he added:

    "Follow the ancient text and the snake thou wast ordered to trample!
    With all thy likeness to God, thou'lt yet be a sorry example."

The idea of "likeness to God," or "God-Almightiness," is not a
scientific one, although it characterises the psychological state of
affairs most exactly. Still we must examine whence this attitude comes,
and ask why it merits the name of "God-Almightiness." As the expression
denotes, the patient's abnormal condition is constituted by the fact
that he ascribes to himself qualities or values which obviously do not
belong to him, for "God-Almightiness" means being like the spirit which
is set above the human spirit.

If for psychological purposes we abstract from the hypostasis of
the God-idea, we find that this expression does not only include
every dynamic fact discussed in my book on "The Psychology of the
Unconscious,"[251] but also a certain mental function having a
collective character, which is of another order from that of the
individual character of the mind. In the same way as the individual is
not only an isolated and separate, but also a social being, so also the
human mind is not only something isolated and absolutely individual,
but also a collective function. And just as certain social functions or
impulses are, so to speak, opposed to the ego-centric interests of the
individual, so also the human mind has certain functions or tendencies
which, on account of their collective nature, are to some extent opposed
to the personal mental functions. This is due to the fact that every
human being is born with a highly differentiated brain, which gives him
the possibility of attaining a rich mental function that he has neither
acquired ontogenetically nor developed. In proportion as human brains
are similarly differentiated, the corresponding mental functions are
collective and universal. This circumstance explains the fact that the
unconscious of far-separated peoples and races possesses a remarkable
number of points of agreement. One example among many others which
has been demonstrated is the extraordinary unanimity shown by the
autochthonous forms and themes of myths.

The universal similarity of brains results in a universal possibility of
a similar mental function. This function is the collective psyche, which
is divided into _collective mind_ and _collective soul_.[252] In so far
as there exist differentiations corresponding to race, descent, or even
family, so, beyond the level of the "universal" collective psyche, we
find a collective psyche limited by race, descent, and family. To quote
_P. Janet_, the collective psyche contains the "parties inférieures"
of the mental function, that is, the part of the mental function
which, being fixed and automatic in its action, inherited and present
everywhere, is therefore super-personal or impersonal. The conscious
and the personal unconscious contain as personal differentiations the
"parties supérieures" of the mental function, therefore the part that
has been acquired and developed ontogenetically.

An individual therefore who joins the _a priori_ and unconsciously-given
collective psyche on to his ontogenetically acquired assets, enlarges
thereby the periphery of his personality in an unjustifiable way, with
the corresponding consequences. Inasmuch as the collective psyche
is the "partie inférieure" of the mental function, and therefore is
the fundamental structure underlying every personality, it weighs
heavily upon and depreciates the personality; a fact that is expressed
in the afore-mentioned stifling of self-confidence, and in the
unconscious increase of the ego-emphasis up to the point of a morbid
will to power. Inasmuch as the collective psyche ranks even above the
personality, because it is the mother foundation upon which all personal
differentiations are based, and because it is the common mental function
of the sum total of the individual, therefore its incorporation in the
personality may evoke inflation of self-confidence, an inflation which
is then compensated by an extraordinary sense of inferiority in the
unconscious.

_A dissolution of the pairs of opposites in the personality sets
in_ if, through the assimilation of the unconscious, the collective
psyche be included in the inventory of the personal mental functions.
Alongside the pairs of opposites already alluded to that are so
particularly evident in the neurotic, viz. megalomania and sense of
inferiority, there are also many other pairs, of which I will only
mention the specifically moral pair, that is, good and evil (_scientes
bonum et malum_). They accompany the increase or depreciation of
self-confidence. The specific virtues and vices of humanity are
contained in the collective psyche, just as everything else is. One
man ascribes all the collective virtue to himself as his own personal
merit; another accounts as personal guilt what is but collective
vice. Both are just as illusionary as the sense of greatness and of
inferiority, for imaginary virtues as well as imaginary vices are only
the pairs of moral opposites contained in the collective psyche, which
have become perceptible or have artificially been made conscious. How
far the collective psyche contains these pairs of opposites is shown
by primitive peoples, whose great virtue is praised by one observer;
whereas another observer of the same race reports only the worst
impressions. Both views are true of primitive man, whose personal
differentiation is only beginning; his mental function is essentially
collective. He is more or less identified with the collective psyche,
and therefore without any personal responsibility or inner conflict; his
virtues and vices are collective. Conflict only begins when a conscious
personal development of the mind has already started, whereby the reason
becomes aware of the irreconcilable nature of the pairs of opposites.
The struggle to repress is the consequence of this realisation. Man
wants to be good, therefore the bad must be repressed; this puts an end
to the paradise of the collective psyche.

The repression of the collective psyche, in so far as it was conscious,
was a necessity for the development of the personality, because
collective psychology and personal psychology are in a certain
sense irreconcilable. In the history of thought, whenever a fresh
psychological attitude acquires collective value the formation of
schisms begins. Nowhere is this more clearly seen than in the history
of religion. A collective point of view, although it may be necessary,
is always dangerous for the individual. It is dangerous because it
is apt to choke and smother personal differentiation. It has derived
this capacity from the collective psyche, which is itself a result of
psychological differentiation of the strong gregarious instincts of
humanity. Collective thought and feeling, and collective accomplishment,
are relatively easy in comparison with individual function and
performance; a fact that is only too prone to lead to a fining down
to the collective level, and is peculiarly disastrous to personal
development. The concomitant loss of personality is replaced--as
is always the case in psychology--by an unconscious all-compelling
binding to and identification with the collective psyche. It cannot
be denied, and should be warningly emphasized that in the analysis
of the unconscious, the collective psychology is merged into the
personal psychology, with the afore-mentioned unpleasant consequences.
These consequences are either bad for the individual's vital feeling
(Lebensgefühl), or they injure his fellow-beings if he have any power
over his environment. Being identified with the collective psyche he
will inevitably try to force the claims of his unconscious upon others,
for identification with the collective psyche is accompanied by a
feeling of universal validity ("God-Almightiness"), which disregards the
different psychology of his fellows.

The worst abuses of this kind may be removed by a clear understanding
and appreciation of the fact that there are totally different
psychological types, and that a psychology of one type cannot be forced
into the mould of another. It is indeed almost impossible for one
type to understand the other completely, and a perfect comprehension
of another's individuality is impossible. _Due regard for another's
individuality_ is not only advisable but is absolutely essential in
analysis, if the development of the other's personality is not to be
stifled. It should not be forgotten that the one type thinks that he is
leaving another person free when he grants him freedom of action, and
the other type when he grants him freedom of thought. In analysis both
must be conceded, in so far as reasons of self-preservation permit the
analyst to accord them. An excessive desire to understand or explain
things is just as useless and injurious as a lack of comprehension.

The collective natural propensities and primary forms of idea and
feeling which analysis of the unconscious has shown to be effective are
an acquisition for the conscious personality which cannot be admitted
unreservedly without prejudicial results.

In practical treatment[253] it is therefore of the utmost importance
to keep the aim of individual development constantly before us. If for
instance the collective psyche be conceived as a personal possession or
as a personal burden, an unbearable weight or strain is put upon the
personality. Hence we must make a clear distinction between the personal
and the collective psyche. In practice this distinction is not easy
because the personal grows out of the collective psyche, and is most
closely joined with it. It is therefore difficult to say which materials
are to be termed collective and which personal. There is no doubt, for
instance, that the archaic symbols so often found in phantasies and
dreams are collective factors. All primary propensities and forms of
thought and feeling are collective; so is everything about which men
are universally agreed, or which is universally understood, said or
done. Upon close consideration it is astonishing to note how much of
our so-called individual psychology is really collective; so much that
the individual element quite disappears. Individuation, however, is
an indispensable psychological requirement. The crushing predominance
of what is collective should make us realise what peculiar care and
attention must be given to the delicate plant "individuality," if it is
to develop.

Human beings have a capacity which is of the utmost use for purposes
of collectivism and most prejudicial to individuation, and that is
the capacity to _imitate_. Collective psychology cannot dispense with
imitation, without which the organization of the State and Society would
be impossible. Imitation includes the idea of suggestibility, suggestive
effect, and mental infection.

But we see daily how the mechanism of imitation is used, or rather
abused, for the purposes of personal differentiation; some prominent
personality, or peculiar trait or activity is simply imitated, which at
least brings about an external differentiation from the environment.
As a rule this delusive attempt to attain individual differentiation
by means of imitation comes to a standstill as mere affectation, the
individual remaining on the same plane as before, only a few degrees
more sterile than formerly, and under an unconscious compulsory bondage
to his environment.

In order to find out what is really individual in us, we should have to
give the matter deep thought, and we should certainly become aware how
exceedingly difficult such a discovery is.


III.--THE INDIVIDUAL AS AN EXCERPT OF THE COLLECTIVE PSYCHE.

We now come to a problem the overlooking of which would cause the
greatest confusion.

As I said before, the immediate result of the analysis of the
unconscious is that additional personal portions of the unconscious are
incorporated into the conscious. I called those parts of the unconscious
which are repressed but capable of being made conscious, _the personal
unconscious_. I showed moreover that through the annexation of the
deeper layers of the unconscious, which I called the _impersonal
unconscious_, an extension of the personality is brought about which
leads to the state of God-Almightiness ("Gottähnlichkeit"). This state
is reached by a continuation of the analytical work, by means of which
we have already re-introduced what is repressed to consciousness. By
continuing analysis further we incorporate some distinctly impersonal
universal basic qualities of humanity with the personal consciousness,
which brings about the aforesaid enlargement, and this to some extent
may be described as an unpleasant consequence of analysis.

From this standpoint, the conscious personality seems to be a more or
less arbitrary excerpt of the collective psyche. It appears to consist
of a number of universal basic human qualities of which it is _à priori_
unconscious, and further of a series of impulses and forms which might
just as well have been conscious, but were more or less arbitrarily
repressed, in order to attain that excerpt of the collective psyche,
which we call personality. The term _persona_ is really an excellent
one, for persona was originally the mask which an actor wore, that
served to indicate the character in which he appeared. For if we really
venture to undertake to decide what psychic material must be accounted
personal and what impersonal, we shall soon reach a state of great
perplexity; for, in truth, we must make the same assertion regarding the
contents of the personality as we have already made with respect to the
impersonal unconscious, that is to say that it is _collective_, whereas
we can only concede _individuality to the bounds of the persona_, that
is to the particular choice of personal elements, and that only to a
very limited extent. It is only by virtue of the fact that the persona
is a more or less accidental or arbitrary excerpt of the collective
psyche that we can lapse into the error of deeming it to be _in toto_
individual, whereas as its name denotes, it is only a mask of the
collective psyche; _a mask which simulates individuality_, making others
and oneself believe that one is individual, whilst one is only acting a
part through which the collective psyche speaks.

If we analyse the persona we remove the mask and discover that what
appeared to be individual is at bottom collective. We thus trace
"the Little God of the World" back to his origin, that is, to a
personification of the collective psyche. Finally, to our astonishment,
we realise that the persona was only the mask of the collective psyche.
Whether we follow Freud and reduce the primary impulse to sexuality,
or Adler and reduce it to the elementary desire for power, or reduce
it to the general principle of the collective psyche which contains
the principles of both Freud and Adler, we arrive at the same result;
namely, the dissolution of the personal into the collective. Therefore
in every analysis that is continued sufficiently far, the moment arrives
when the aforesaid God-Almightiness must be realised. This condition
is often ushered in by peculiar symptoms; for instance, by dreams of
flying through space like a comet, of being either the earth, the sun,
or a star, or of being either extraordinarily big or small, of having
died, etc. Physical sensations also occur, such as sensations of being
too large for one's skin, or too fat; or hypnagogic feelings of endless
sinking or rising occur, of enlargement of the body or of dizziness.
This state is characterised psychologically by an extraordinary loss of
orientation about one's personality, about what one really is, or else
the individual has a positive but mistaken idea of that which he has
just become. Intolerance, dogmatism, self-conceit, self-depreciation,
contempt and belittling of "not analysed" fellow-beings, and also of
their opinions and activities, all very frequently occur. An increased
disposition to physical disorders may also occasionally be observed,
but this occurs only if pleasure be taken therein, thus prolonging this
stage unduly.

The wealth of the possibilities of the collective psyche is both
confusing and dazzling. The dissolution of the persona results in
the release of phantasy, which apparently is nothing else but the
functioning of the collective psyche. This release brings materials into
consciousness of whose existence we had no suspicion before. A rich mine
of mythological thought and feeling is revealed. It is very hard to hold
one's own against such an overwhelming impression. That is why this
phase must be reckoned one of the real dangers of analysis, a fact that
should not be concealed.

As may easily be understood, this condition is hardly bearable, and one
would like to put an end to it as soon as possible, for the analogy with
a mental derangement is too close. The essence of the most frequent form
of derangement--dementia præcox or schizophrenia--consists, as is well
known, in the fact that the unconscious to a large extent ejects and
replaces the conscious. The unconscious is given the value of reality,
being substituted for the reality function. The unconscious thoughts
become audible as voices, or visible as visions, or perceptible as
physical hallucinations, or they become fixed ideas of a kind that
supersede reality. In a similar, although not in the same way, by the
resolution of the persona of the collective psyche, the unconscious is
drawn into the conscious. The difference between this state of mind and
that of mental derangement consists in the fact that the unconscious is
brought up by the help of the conscious analysis; at least that is the
case in the beginning of analysis, when there are still strong cultural
resistances against the unconscious to be overcome. Later on, after the
removal of the barriers erected by time and custom, the unconscious
usually proceeds, so to say, in a peremptory manner, sometimes even
discharging itself in torrents into the consciousness. In this phase
the analogy with mental derangement is very close. But it would only
be a real mental disorder should the content of the unconscious _take
the place of the conscious reality_, that is, in other words, if the
contents of the unconscious were believed absolutely and without reserve.


IV.--THE ENDEAVOURS TO FREE THE INDIVIDUALITY FROM THE COLLECTIVE PSYCHE.

1. _The Regressive Restoration of the Persona._

The unbearableness of thus being identified with the collective psyche
forces us to find a radical solution. There are two ways open. The first
possibility is the regressive one of trying to restore the persona to
its former condition, by endeavouring to restrain the unconscious by the
application of a reductive theory; for instance, by declaring it to be
nothing but long-repressed and overdue infantile sexuality, for which
it would really be best to substitute the normal sexual function. This
solution is based upon the unmistakable sexualistic symbolism of the
language of the unconscious, and upon the concretistic interpretation
of the same. Or an attempt may be made to apply the power theory,
by conceiving the God-Almightiness as a "virile protest," and as an
infantile striving for power and self-preservation: a theory for which
support is found in the unmistakable pretensions to power that the
unconscious material contains. A further possibility would be to declare
the unconscious to be the archaic collective psychology of primitive
man, an explanation that would not only cover the sexualistic symbolism
and the "God-Almighty" aiming for power of the unconscious content, but
would also apparently do justice to the religious, philosophical, and
mythological aspects and tendencies of the unconscious content. In every
case the conclusion arrived at is the same, viz. that the unconscious is
nothing but this or that, which has already been adequately recognised
and acknowledged as infantile, useless, meaningless, impossible, and out
of date. There is nothing to be done but to shrug one's shoulders and
resign one's self to the inevitable.

To the patient there seems to be no alternative, if one wishes to
continue to live sensibly, but to restore in so far as is possible
that extract of the collective psyche termed persona, to lay the fact
of analysis silently aside, and do one's utmost to forget that one
possesses an unconscious. We shall find support in Faust's words:--

    "The sphere of earth is known enough to me;
    The view beyond is barred immutably:
    A fool, who there his blinking eyes directeth,
    And o'er his clouds of peers a place expecteth!
    Firm let him stand, and look around him well!
    This world means something to the capable.
    Why needs he through Eternity to wend?
    He here acquires what he can apprehend.
    Thus let him wander down his earthly day;
    When spirits haunt go quietly his way;
    In marching onward, bliss and torment find,
    Though every moment, with unsated mind!"

This would be a happy solution if one really could succeed in throwing
off the unconscious to such an extent as to withdraw the libido from
it, and so render it inoperative. But experience proves that energy
cannot be withdrawn from the unconscious; it continues operative, for
the unconscious contains and is indeed itself the source of libido,
from which issue the primary psychic elements, thought-feelings, or
feeling-thoughts--undifferentiated germs of idea and sentiment. It would
therefore be a delusion to believe that by means of some, so to say,
magical theory or method, the libido could be conclusively wrested from
the unconscious, or that it could be to a certain extent disconnected.
One may yield to this illusion for a time, but some day he will be
obliged to declare with Faust:--

    "Now fills the air so many a haunting shape,
    That no one knows how best he may escape.
    What though one day with rational brightness beams,
    The night entangles us in webs of dreams.
    From our young fields of life we come, elate:
    There croaks a bird; what croaks he? Evil fate!
    By superstition constantly ensnared,
    It grows to us and warns and is declared.
    Intimidated thus we stand alone.--
    The portal jars, yet entrance is there none.
    Is any one here?

    CARE: Yes! must be my reply.

    FAUST: And, thou, who art thou, then?

    CARE: Well--here am I.

    FAUST: Avaunt!

    CARE: _I am where I should be_:
    Though no ear should choose to hear me,
    Yet the shrinking heart must fear me;
    Though transformed to mortal eyes,
    Grimmest power I exercise."

The unconscious cannot be "analysed" to a finish, and thus brought to
a standstill. No one can wrest active force from it for any length of
time. Therefore to act according to the method just described is only
to deceive one's self, and is nothing but a new edition of an ordinary
repression.

2. _The Identification with the Collective Psyche._

The second way would be that of identification with the collective
psyche. That would mean the symptom of "God-Almightiness" developed
into a system; in other words, one would be the fortunate possessor of
the absolute truth, that had yet to be discovered; of the conclusive
knowledge, which would be the people's salvation. This attitude is
not necessarily megalomania ("Grössenwahn") in a direct form, but the
well-known milder form of having a prophetic mission. Weak minds which,
as is so often the case, have correspondingly an undue share of vanity
and misplaced naïveté at their disposal, run a considerable risk of
succumbing to this temptation. The obtaining access to the collective
psyche signifies a renewal of life for the individual, whether this
renewal of life be felt as something pleasant or unpleasant. It would
seem desirable to retain a hold upon this renewal: for one person,
because it increases his feeling for life ("Lebensgefühl"); for another,
because it promises a great accretion to his knowledge. Therefore both
of them, not wishing to deprive themselves of the rich values that lie
buried in the collective psyche, will endeavour by every means possible
to retain their newly gained union with the primal cause of life.
Identification appears to be the nearest way to it, for the merging of
the persona in the collective psyche is a veritable lure to unite one's
self with this "ocean of divinity," and, oblivious of the past, to
become absorbed in it. This piece of mysticism belongs to every finer
individual, just as the "yearning for the mother"--the looking back to
the source whence one originated--is innate in every one.

As I have demonstrated explicitly before,[254] there is a special value
and a special necessity hidden in the regressive longing--which, as is
well-known, Freud conceives as "infantile fixation" or as "incest-wish."
This necessity and longing is particularly emphasized in myths, where it
is always the strongest and best of people, in other words, the hero,
who follows the regressive longing and deliberately runs into danger of
letting himself be devoured by the monster of the maternal first cause.
But he is a hero only because, instead of letting himself be finally
devoured by the monster, he conquers it, and that not only once but
several times. It is only through the conquest of the collective psyche
that its true value can be attained, whether it be under the symbol
of capture of treasure, of an invincible weapon, of a magical means
of defence, or whatever else the myth devises as the most desirable
possession. Hence whoever identifies himself with the collective psyche,
also reaches the treasure which the dragon guards, but against his will
and to his own great injury, by thus allowing himself (mythologically
speaking) to be devoured by the monster and merged with it.

Identification with the collective psyche is therefore a failure;
this way ends just as disastrously as did the first, which led to the
severance of the persona from the collective psyche.


V.--LEADING PRINCIPLES FOR THE TREATMENT OF COLLECTIVE IDENTITY.

In order to solve the problem how practical treatment can overcome the
assimilation of the collective psyche, we must first of all make quite
clear to ourselves what was the error of the two ways already described.
We saw that neither the one way nor the other led to any appropriate
result. The first way simply leads the patient back to the point of
departure, having lost the vital values contained in the collective
psyche. The second way leads him straight into the collective psyche,
having lost that detached human existence which alone renders possible a
bearable and satisfying life. There are on both sides values that should
not be lost to the individual.

The mistake is, therefore, neither in the collective psyche nor in the
individual psyche, _but in allowing the one to exclude the other_.
The monistic tendency assists this propensity, for it always suspects
and looks for _one_ principle everywhere. As a general psychological
tendency, monism is a peculiarity of differentiated feeling and thought,
corresponding to the keen desire to make the one or the other function
the supreme psychological principle. The introversion type only knows
the thought principle, and the extroversion type only that of feeling.
This psychological monism--or it would be better to say monotheism--has
the advantage of simplicity, and the disadvantage of one-sidedness. On
the one hand, it signifies the exclusion of the variety and true riches
of life; whilst on the other, it means the practicability of realizing
the ideals of the present day and of the near past. But it does not in
itself signify any actual possibility of human progress.

In the same way _rationalism_ tends towards exclusiveness. Its essence
is to exclude instantly whatever is opposed to its standpoint, whether
it be intellectually logical or emotionally so. In regard to reason
it is both monistic and autocratic. Special thanks are due to Bergson
for having broken a lance for the right of the irrational to exist.
Psychology will probably be obliged to acknowledge and to submit to a
plurality of principles, in spite of the fact that this does not suit
the scientific mind. Only so can psychology be saved from ship-wreck.

But with regard to individual psychology science must waive its claims.
For to speak of a scientific individual psychology is in itself a
_contradictio in adjecto_. It is necessarily always only the collective
part of an individual psychology that can be the subject of scientific
study, for the individual is--according to definition--something unique
and incomparable. A "scientific" individual psychology is a denial
of individual psychology. It may justly be suspected that individual
psychology is indeed a projection of the psychology of him who defines
it. Every individual psychology must have its own text-book, for the
universal text-book only contains collective psychology.

These remarks are intended to prepare for what has to be said about
the treatment of the aforesaid problem. The fundamental error of both
the afore-mentioned ways is simply that the subject is collectively
identified with the one or the other part of his psychology. His
psychology is individual as well as collective, but not in such a manner
as to merge the individual with what is collective, or the collective
with what is individual. The persona must be strictly separated from the
concept of the individual, in so far as the persona can be absolutely
merged with the collective. But what is individual is just that which
can never be absorbed in the collective, and is, too, never identical
with the collective. Therefore, an identification with the collective or
an arbitrary cutting-off from the collective is equivalent to illness;
it is pathological.

As has already been indicated, what is individual appears at first as
the particular selection of those elements of the collective psyche
that contribute to the composition of the persona. As I said before,
the components are not individual but collective. It is only their
combination, or the selection as a model of particular groups that
had already been combined, which is individual. That would be the
individual nucleus which is concealed by the personal mask. By the
particular differentiation of the persona, the resistance is shown of
the individuality to the collective psyche. By analysing the persona, we
transfer a greater value to the individuality, increasing thereby its
conflict with collectivity. This conflict obviously is a psychological
conflict in the individual. The dissolution of the compromise between
the two halves of a pair of opposites increases the effectiveness of
the contrast. This conflict does not exist within the sphere of purely
unconscious natural life, although the purely physiological life of the
individual also has to comply with collective demands.

The natural unconscious attitude is harmonious; the body, with its
capacities and needs, providing immediately indications and limitations,
that prevent intemperance and lack of proportion. A differentiated
psychological function, however, always inclines towards disproportion,
on account of the one-sidedness which is cultivated by the conscious
rationality of intention. What is called mental individuality, is,
also, an expression of the individual corporeity, being, so to speak,
identical with it. This sentence might obviously also be reversed,
a fact that does not materially alter the real psychological data
concerning the intimate relation of the individuality to the body. At
the same time, the body is also that which makes the subject resemble
all others to a great extent, although it is the individual body that is
differentiated from all others.

Similarly the mental or moral individuality differs from all others,
although in every respect it is so constituted as to place one person
on an equality with all others. Every living creature that is able
freely to develop itself individually without any coercion at all, will,
through the perfecting of its individuality, soonest realize the ideal
type of its species, and therefore, figuratively speaking, will have
collective validity.

The persona is always identical with a _typical_ attitude, in which
_one_ pyschological function dominates, _e.g._ feeling, or thought, or
intuition. This one-sidedness always causes the relative repression of
the other functions. In consequence of this circumstance, the persona
is hindering to the development of the individual. The dissolution of
the persona is, therefore, an indispensable condition of individuation.
It is, therefore, to some extent impossible to achieve individuation
by means of conscious intention; for conscious intention leads to a
conscious attitude, which excludes everything that "does not suit." But
the assimilation of the unconscious contents leads, on the contrary, to
a condition in which conscious intention is excluded, being replaced by
a process of development that appears to us irrational. This process
alone signifies individuation, its _product_ being individuality as
defined above, viz. as something individual that is at the same time
universal. So long as the persona exists individuality is repressed,
betraying itself at most by the particular selection of personal
requisites, of what might be called the actor's costumes. Only when the
unconscious is assimilated does the individuality become more prominent,
and with it also that uniting psychological phenomenon between the
ego and non-ego, expressed by the word _attitude_, is now no longer a
typical attitude but an individual one.

What is paradoxical in these formulations arises from the same cause
from which the conflict about the "universalia" formerly arose. The
phrase "animal nullumque animal genus est" makes the fundamental paradox
clearly comprehensible. What exists "really" is individual: that which
is universal is existing psychologically, but being caused by the
real-existing similarities of individual things. The individual is,
therefore, the individual thing that has, to a greater or less extent,
those attributes upon which the collective conception of "collectivity"
rests; and the more individual he is, the more he develops those
attributes that are the basis of a collective concept of human nature.

If a grotesque figure, suggested by the initial situation of our problem
be permitted, it is Buridan's ass between the two bundles of hay.
His questioning is obviously wrong: the question is not whether the
hay-bundle on the right or the left be the better one, or whether he
should begin to eat on the right or the left hand, _but what he himself
would like to do, what he is eager for_--that is the point. He is
thinking of the hay and not of himself, and therefore he does not know
what he really wants.

The question is: what at this moment is the natural direction of the
growth of this individual?

This question cannot be settled by any philosophy, religion or good
advice, but solely by an unprejudiced review of the psychological
germs of life which have resulted from the natural co-operation of the
conscious and unconscious on the one hand, and of the individual and the
collective on the other. One person looks for them in the conscious, and
another in the unconscious. But the conscious is only one side, and the
unconscious is only the other. For it should never be forgotten that
dreams are compensatory or complementary to consciousness. Were this not
the case, we should be obliged to regard dreams as a source of knowledge
superior to the conscious. This view would undoubtedly carry us back
to the mentality of the augur, and we should have to accept all the
consequences of such a superstitious attitude, unless, indeed, we look
upon dreams as valueless, as does the vulgar mind.

We find the _unifying function_ that we are seeking, _in the
phantasies_ in which everything that has any effectual determination
is present. But phantasies have a bad reputation among psychologists.
The psychoanalytical theories hitherto obtaining have treated them
accordingly. For both Freud and Adler the phantasy is nothing but a
so-called "symbolic" disguise of what both investigators suppose to be
the primary propensities and aims. But in opposition to these views it
should be emphasised--not for theoretical but for essentially practical
reasons--that the phantasy may indeed be thus causally explained
and depreciated, but that it nevertheless is the creative soil for
everything that has ever brought development to humanity. The phantasy
as a psychological function has a peculiar non-reducible value of its
own, whose roots are in both the conscious and the unconscious contents,
and in what is collective as well as in what is individual.

But whence comes the bad reputation of the phantasy? It owes that
reputation chiefly to the circumstance that it ought not to be taken
literally. It is worthless if understood concretistically. If we
understand semiotically, as Freud does, it is interesting from the
scientific standpoint. But if it be understood _hermeneutically, as an
actual symbol_, it provides us with the cue that we need in order to
develop our life in harmony with ourselves.

For the significance of a symbol is not that it is a disguised
indication of something that is generally known,[255] but that it is
an endeavour to elucidate by analogy what is as yet completely unknown
and only in process of formation.[256] The phantasy represents to us
that which is just developing under the form of a more or less apposite
analogy. By analytical reduction to something universally known, we
destroy the actual value of the symbol; but it is appropriate to its
value and meaning to give it an hermeneutical interpretation.

The essence of hermeneutics--an art that was formerly much
practised--consists in adding more analogies to that already given
by the symbol: in the first place, subjective analogies given by the
patient as they occur to him; and in the second place, objective
analogies provided by the analyst out of his general knowledge. The
initial symbol is much enlarged and enriched by this procedure, the
result being a highly complex and many-sided picture, which may now be
reduced to _tertia comparationis_. Thence result certain psychological
lines of development of an individual as well as collective nature.
No science upon earth could prove the accuracy of these lines; on the
contrary, rationalism could very easily prove that they are wrong. But
these lines vindicate their validity by their _value for life_. The
chief thing in practical treatment is that people should get a hold of
their own life, not that the principle of their life should be provable
or "right."

Of course, true to the spirit of scientific superstition _suggestion_
will be mooted. But it should long ago have been realised that a
suggestion is only accepted by one it suits. Beyond that there
is no suggestion, otherwise the treatment of neurosis would be
extremely simple, for we should only need to suggest health. This
pseudo-scientific talk about suggestion is based upon the unconscious
superstition that suggestion actually possesses some real magic power.
No one succumbs to suggestion unless from the very bottom of his heart
he be willing to co-operate.

By means of the hermeneutical treatment of the phantasies we arrive
at the synthesis of the individual with the collective psyche, put
theoretically, that is, but practically, one indispensable condition
is yet lacking. For it belongs to the regressive disposition of the
neurotic--a disposition in which he has been confirmed in the course of
his illness--to take neither himself nor the world seriously, but always
to rely on this or that method or circumstance to effect a cure, quite
apart from his own serious co-operation. "But you can't wash the dog
without getting his skin wet." No cure can be effected without unlimited
willingness and absolute seriousness on the part of the patient. There
are no magical cures for neurosis. Just as soon as we begin to elaborate
the symbolic outlines of the path, the patient must begin to walk
thereon. If he delude himself and shirk it, no cure can result. He must
really work and live according to what he has seen and recognised as
the direction for the time being of his individual life-line, and must
continue thereon until a distinct reaction of his unconscious shows him
that he is beginning in good faith to go a wrong way.

He who does not possess this moral function of faithfulness to himself
will never get rid of his neurosis; but he who has this faithfulness can
find the way out.

Neither physician nor patient must yield to the delusion that "being
analysed" is in itself sufficient to remove a neurosis. That would be
deception and self-delusion. Ultimately it is infallibly the moral
factor that decides between health and illness.

By the construction of the individual's life-line the ever-varying
trends and tendencies of his libido are made conscious. These life-lines
are not identical with the "directing fictions" discovered by Adler,
which are none other than arbitrary attempts to cut the persona off from
the collective psyche, and to give it independence. It might rather
be said that the "directing fiction" is an unsuccessful attempt to
construct a life-line. The unsuitability of the "directing fiction" is
also proved by the fact that the lines are tenaciously retained for much
too long a time. The hermeneutically constructed life-line is short, for
life follows no straight lines that indicate the future long beforehand,
for, as Nietzsche says, "All truth is crooked." Life-lines are therefore
neither principles nor ideals of universal validity, but points of view
and adaptations of ephemeral validity. An abatement of vital intensity,
a perceptible loss of libido, or an excessive passion or ecstasy--all
show that one such line is left, and that a new line begins, or rather
should begin. Sometimes it is enough to leave the revealing of the
new line to the unconscious; but this course should indeed not be
recommended to the neurotic under all circumstances, though there are
cases where what is needed is to learn to trust to so-called chance.
However, it is not advisable to let one's self drift for any length
of time; a watchful eye should at least be kept upon the reactions of
the unconscious, that is to say, upon the dreams: these indicate like a
barometer the one-sidedness of our attitude.[257] Therefore, I consider
it necessary, in contrast to some other analysts, for the patient after
analysis to remain in contact with the unconscious, if he would avoid
a relapse. That is why I am convinced that the real end of analysis is
reached when the patient has acquired adequate knowledge of the method
to remain in contact with the unconscious, and sufficient psychological
knowledge to be able to understand approximately his ever-changing
life-line; otherwise he is not in a position to follow the direction of
the libido currents in the unconscious, and thereby to gain conscious
support in the development of his individuality. Every serious case of
neurosis needs this weapon in order to maintain the cure.

In this sense analysis is not a method that is a medical monopoly, but
rather an art or technique or science of psychological life, which he
who has been cured must continue to foster, for the sake of his own
welfare and that of his environment. If he understands this aright he
will not pose as a psychoanalytical prophet nor as a public reformer,
but truly understanding the common weal, he will first himself reap
the benefit of the self-knowledge acquired in his treatment, and then
he will let the example of his life work what good it can, rather than
indulge in aggressive talk and missionary propaganda.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 249: Lecture given before the Zürich School for Analytical
Psychology, 1916.]

[Footnote 250: In a certain sense the "likeness to God" is always
_a priori_ present even before analysis, not only in the neurotic,
but also in the normal individual, with the difference only that the
normal individual is effectively separated from the perception of the
unconscious, whilst this separation becomes increasingly impossible to
the neurotic. In consequence of his special sensitiveness, the neurotic
is _a priori_ more closely affected by the processes of the unconscious
than is the normal person, wherefore the God-Almightiness becomes more
distinct in him than in the normal individual. By means of the knowledge
of the unconscious acquired through analysis the "God-likeness" is
increased.]

[Footnote 251: Pp. 69 and 95.]

[Footnote 252: The collective mind represents collective thought, the
collective soul represents collective feeling, and the _collective
psyche_ represents the general collective psychological function.]

[Footnote 253: I should here observe that I am intentionally refraining
from discussing our problem from the standpoint of the psychology
of types. A specialised and somewhat complicated investigation was
necessary in order to discover formulations appropriate to the types.
For instance, "person" means something totally different to the
extrovert from what it does to the introvert. I must content myself
here with pointing out the difficulties such a task would involve. In
the types, the conscious and real adapted function in childhood is
collective, but soon acquires a personal character, and may retain this
to the end, unless the individual feels impelled to develop his type
to the uttermost. If this happens, the conscious real adapted function
attains a degree of perfection which may claim universal validity
and therefore bears a collectivistic character, in contrast to its
originally collective character. According to this mode of expression
collective psyche would be identical with "herd soul" in the individual;
but the collectivistic psychology would be a highly differentiated
adaptation to society. For the introvert the conscious real adapted
function is _thinking_, which in the lower stages of development is
entirely personal, but has a tendency to acquire a universal character
of a collectivistic kind; his feeling remains distinctly personal so far
as it is conscious, and collective-archaic in so far as it has remained
unconscious or is repressed. The opposite applies to the _feeling_ and
thought of the extrovert. The introvert is always concerned with the
endeavour to preserve the integrity of his ego, which results in a
different attitude towards his own person from that of the extrovert,
whose adaptation is made through his feelings, even at the cost of his
own person. These few sentences indicate into what an extraordinarily
difficult situation we should have been led had we considered our
problem from the standpoint of the types.]

[Footnote 254: "Psychology of the Unconscious."]

[Footnote 255: That is, of a universal primary propensity or a universal
primal aim.]

[Footnote 256: Cp. _Silberer_: "Probleme der Mystic und ihrer Symbolik."
Wien, 1914. ("Problems of Mysticism and its Symbolism.")]

[Footnote 257: It should be borne in mind that no moral function is to
be sought in this conception of dreams, nor do I look for it there.
This function is just as little "teleological" in the sense of a
philosophical teleology, that is to say of a set aim or purpose. It
is in the first place compensatory, because it presents a subliminal
picture of the actual situation. The phenomenon should first of all be
understood from a purely causal standpoint. But it would be unjust to
the essence of what is psychological if one were to consider it purely
causally. For it does not only tolerate, but also demand, a final
point of view. In other words, the question arises, what is the use of
bringing just this material to constellation? This is not to assert that
the final meaning of a phenomenon had already existed as an _a priori_
given purpose in the preparatory stages of the phenomenon. It would not
be permissible, according to the theory of cognition, to presuppose some
pre-existing purpose from the unmistakable final meaning of biological
mechanisms. But it would be narrow-minded if, with the justifiable
omission of the teleological conclusion, one wished also to give up the
point of view of finality. The utmost that can be said is, it is _as if_
there were some pre-existing purpose present. In psychology one must be
on one's guard against exclusive reliance either upon causality or upon
teleology.]


SUMMARY.

A. _Psychological Material must be divided into_ CONSCIOUS _and_
UNCONSCIOUS _Contents_.

1. The _conscious contents_ are partly _personal_, in so far as their
universal validity is not recognised; and partly _impersonal_, that is,
collective, in so far as their universal validity is recognised.

2. The _unconscious contents_ are partly _personal_, in so far as they
concern solely repressed materials of a personal nature, that have once
been relatively conscious and whose universal validity is therefore not
recognised when they are made conscious; partly _impersonal_, in so far
as the materials concerned are recognised as _impersonal_ and of purely
universal validity, of whose earlier even relative consciousness we have
no means of proof.


B. _The Composition of the Persona._

1. The conscious personal contents constitute the conscious personality,
the conscious ego.

2. The unconscious personal contents constitute the _self_, the
unconscious or subconscious ego.

3. The conscious and unconscious contents of a personal nature
constitute the persona.


C. _The Composition of the Collective Psyche._

1. The conscious and unconscious contents of an _impersonal_ or
collective nature compose the psychological _non-ego_, the _image of
the object_. These materials can appear analytically as projections of
feeling or of opinion, but they are _a priori_ collectively identical
with the object-imago, that is they appear as qualities of the object,
and are only _a posteriori_ recognised as subjective psychological
qualities.

2. The persona is that grouping of conscious and unconscious contents
which is opposed as ego to the non-ego. The general comparison
of personal contents of different individuals establishes their
far-reaching similarity, extending even to identity, by which the
_individual_ nature of personal contents, and therewith of the persona,
is for the most part suspended. To this extent the persona must be
considered an excerpt of the collective psyche, and also a component of
the collective psyche.

3. The collective psyche is therefore composed of the object-imago and
the persona.


D. _What is Individual._

1. What is individual appears partly as the principle that decides the
selection and limitation of the contents that are accepted as personal.

2. What is individual is the principle by which an increasing
differentiation from the collective psyche is made possible and enforced.

3. What is individual manifests itself partly as an impediment to
collective accomplishment, and as a resistance against collective
thinking and feeling.

4. What is individual is the uniqueness of the combination of universal
(collective) psychological elements.


E. _We must divide the Conscious and Unconscious Contents into
Individualistic and Collectivistic._

1. A content is individualistic whose developing tendency is directed
towards the differentiation from the collective.

2. A content is collectivistic whose developing tendency aims at
universal validity.

3. There are insufficient criteria by which to designate a given content
as simply individual or collective, for uniqueness is very difficult to
prove, although it is a perpetually and universally recurrent phenomenon.

4. The life-line of an individual is the resultant of the
individualistic and collectivistic tendency of the psychological process
at any given moment.




INDEX


    _Aberrations of Marriage_ (Michaelis), 365

    Abreaction, 242

    Absolute unconscious, 430-36

    Abstract feelings, 405
        "    idea, 438, 448

    Abstraction, 293

    Accidentalness, 398

    Accoucheur, the analyst as, 268, 374

    Acts, symptomatic (Freud), 281

    Adaptation to father, 127, 160, 175
        "         mother, 125, 159, 171, 232

    Adapted function, 405

    Adler, viii, ix, 191, 223, 260-61, 290, 297-98, 330, 340, 343-44,
      349, 352, 384-85, 390-91, 404, 458, 470

    Alcohol, influence of, 12

    Altruism, 269

    Ambitendency, 200

    Ambivalency, 200, 269

    Amnesia of Ivenes, 68

       "       periodic, 9

    Amnesic disturbances, 66-7

    Anæsthesia, systematic, 68

    Analysis not a reasoning method, 208
      "      prejudices against, 206-07
      "      sexualistic conception of, vii
      "      _v._ interpretation, 219

    Analyst as accoucheur, 268, 374

    "       must be analysed, 244

    Analytical material compared with poet's material, 214

    "          psychology, moral effect of, 375-76

    Anamnesis not psychoanalysis, 207

    Anna, little, 132-54

    Antithesis, regulating function of, 415

    Anxiety dreams, 160, 372

    Apollo, Introversion, 295

    Archaic view of life, x

    "Arrangements" (Adler), 297, 390

    Aschaffenburg, 352

    Ass, Buridan's, 467

    Assimilation by analogy, 223

    Assimilation of unconscious, 449

    Association, co-ordinance to father, 157
         "       familiar, 120-32, 159
         "       method, 80

    Association-concordance (Kerner), 92
         "         test, calculation in, 109
         "           "   guilt complex, 107

    Attack, hysterical (Ivenes) ætiology of, 74

    Attention, dispersion of, 46-8

    _Attitudes passionelles_, 18

    Augur, medical, 244, 467

    Authority, faith in, 277

    Autochthonous myths, 451

    Auto-hypnosis, 77, 240

    Automatic personalities (Ivenes), 82
       "      table movements, 49, 53, 57
       "      writing, 27, 49, 54, 57

    Automatism, motor cryptomnesia, 91
        "       as hypnotist, 79

    Automatisms, 13, 47, 49, 54
        "        of S. W., 20

    Autonomous complexes, 375

    Auto-suggestion, 51, 53, 61
      "      "       (objective), 79

    Azam, case of Albert X., 9
      "      "    Felida, 66


    Babel, tower of, 416

    Baptism, the rite analysed, 215

    Bayle, 315

    Bergson, 231, 274, 293, 315, 348, 357, 464

    Bernheim, 237

    Binet, 2, 12, 47, 56, 59, 60, 85, 289, 353

    Binet's definition of somnambulism, 49

    Biological duties, 274

    Bircher, 250

    Birth, theories of child, 134

    Bleuler, 5, 14, 201, 312, 354

    Bleuler's theory of negativism, 201

    Boileau's case, 9

    Bonamaison's case, 76

    Bourne, Ansel, case of, 9

    Bourru and Burot, 66

    Brains, similarity of, 451

    Bresler's case, 89

    Breuer, 236, 241

    Breuer's case, 356-358

    Brill, 175

    Burgholzi, cases of mental disease analysed, 316
      "           "     dementia præcox, 322, 328-35

    Buridan's ass, 467


    Calculation in association test, 109

    Camuset, 66

    Case, Azam's, 9, 66
      "   Boileau's, 9
      "   Bonamaison's, 76
      "   Bresler's, 89
      "   Breuer's, 356-58
      "   Dyce's, 84
      "   Flournoy's, 69
      "   Hoefelt's, 66
      "   Janet's, 55
      "   Kalk's, 65
      "   Macnish's, 11
      "   Mesnet's, 10-11
      "   Naef's, 8
      "   Pronst's, 9, 11
      "   Renaudin's, 67
      "   Schreber's, 343-46
      "   Weir Mitchell's, 64-5, 84

    Case of Albert X. (Azam), 9
      "     American business man, 399
      "     Christ, 394
      "     Elise K., 3-7
      "     Felida (Azam), 66
      "     Helen Smith (Flournoy), 69
      "     little Anna, 132-54
      "     little Hans, 132
      "     Lucie (Janet), 55
      "     Mary Reynolds (Weir-Mitchell), 64-5, 84
      "     S. W., 16-45

    Cases of dementia præcox, 322, 328-35
      "      mental disease analysed (Burgholzi's), 316

    Catalepsy (Ivenes), 28

    Catharsis, 374

    Catholic Church, 271

    Causal principle in science, 339
    "      view (Freud), 261

    Cellini, Benvenuto, 63

    Censor, Freud, 305

    Change in character (Azam's case), 66
      "          "      (Hoefelt's case), 66
      "          "      (Ivenes), 84
      "          "      (Kalk's case), 65
      "          "      (Mary Reynolds), 64
      "          "      (S. W.), 69

    Charcot, 8, 356, 361
      "      classification of somnambulic states, 8
      "      trauma theory, 361

    Chevreul, 50

    Christ, religion of, 366

    Christian science, 126, 207, 244, 249

    Civilisation and neurosis, 224, 374

    Claparède, 188, 232, 348
      "        (footnote), 287

    Clark lectures, 94-156

    Classification of dreams, 310

    Co-function in unconscious, 405

    Collective psyche, 431-32, 455-59, 472
      "          "     identification with, 459, 462
      "          "     treatment of, 463
      "        mind and soul, 451
      "        vices and virtues, 453

    Comparison of dream-symbols with somnambulic personalities, 59

    Compensation, unconscious, 201, 236, 280, 284, 285, 467

    Complex, concealment, 117
      "      Electra, 228
      "      incompatibility, 202
      "      Kern, 228
      "      Œdipus, 228, 232
      "      resistance, 201
      "      sensibility, 203

    Complexes, autonomous, 377
      "        function, 426
      "        physicians' own, 216, 243, 257

    Comprehension by analogy, 223

    Conflict moral, 225, 242, 247, 251

    Content, manifest and latent of dream, 372

    Conscious invention _v._ dream, 178
      "       material, use of in analysis, 216

    Consciousness alternating, 11
      "           double, 1

    Conservation of energy, 231, 411

    Constellation, parental, 160-75

    Constellations, familiar, 119-132

    Converted _libido_, 141

    Cook, Miss Florence, 37

    Correspondence of Jung and Loy, 236-77

    Counterparts of virtues, 389

    Creative work of unconscious, additional, 85

    Crucial points in Psychoanalysis, 236-77

    Cryptomnesia, 78, 86, 87, 199
      "           Nietzsche example, 87

    Cryptomnesic hallucinations, 91
      "          motor-automatism, 91


    Darkness, effect of, on suggestibility, 59

    Dawson Williams, Dr., 278

    Deception, Ivenes' wilful, 44
      "        of doctor by patient, 260, 266-67

    "Deep" Psychology, 354

    Defence mechanism, 424

    Deficiency, emotional, 2

    Deficiency, intellectual, 2
      "         mental, 2
      "         neurasthenic, 14
      "         psychopathic, 3, 13

    Definition of _libido_, 156, 288

    Delbruck, 70

    Delirium, hysterical, 7

    Dementia præcox, 129, 143, 149, 151, 182, 201, 283, 312-18

    _Depreciation_ by introverted type, 289

    Depressions of puberty, 127

    Dessoir, 85

    Diagnosis of facts, 106-13

    Diehl, 14

    Differentiation of what is individual, 456

    Dionysus, 183
      "       extraversion, 295

    Dionysian orgies, 366

    "Disposable" energy, 401

    Distortion produced by resistances, 285

    Dogma, 224

    Dominants of unconscious, 432-33

    Double consciousness, 1, 84

    Dragon, symbol of collective psyche, 463

    Dream-analysis the real instrument of the unconscious, 209, 373

    Dreams, anxiety, 160, 372
      "     as myth, 436
      "     association method, 302
      "     classification of, 310
      "     compensatory character of, 278-286, 467
      "     conception of differing from Freud, 222
      "     content, manifest and latent, 372
      "     Freud's conception of, 222
      "     instances of analysed, 147, 193, 217, 219, 303
      "     many-sided, 217
      "     moral function of, 309, 471
      "     no arbitrary interpretation, 218
      "     no fixed symbols, 218, 221, 265, 308
      "     number, 191, 193, 197
      "     objective interpretation of, 421
      "     of crab analysed, 418
      "     St. Augustine's, 307
      "     subjective interpretation of, 421
      "     symbolism of, 308
      "     typical themes of, 310

    Dualism in Ivenes' subconscious personalities, 79

    Dubois, 208, 243, 255

    Duplication of attributes, 182

    Duty to children, parental, 153

    Duties biological, 274


    Ecce Homo, 381-84, 417

    Eccentricities pre-exist illness, 282, 289

    Ecstasy, 15, 20
      "      (Bettina Brentano), 75

    Ego-complex, 80, 86
      "    "     (Ivenes), 83
      " function, 416
      " instinct, 383
      " powerlessness of, 450
      " psychological, 434

    Ego, second (Dessoir), 85
      "  somnambulic (Ivenes), 76

    _Elan vital_, 231

    Electra-complex, 228

    Emotional type, Fourneau Jordan, 402

    Empiricism, 291, 301

    Enantiodromia, 415-17

    Energic view point, 231

    Energy as Melungu, 413
      "    conservation of, 411
      "    "disposable," 401
      "    primordial image of, 412
      "    psychic, 401
      "    transformation of, 413

    Entoptic phenomena, 61

    Enuresis nocturna, 170, 237, 239, 246

    Epilepsy, 1

    Epileptoid attacks, 14

    Erler, 71

    Erotic conflict, 364-65, 370

    Esquirol, 315

    _Etat second_, 8

    Etiological moment of neurosis, 405

    Exhaustive states, 13

    Experiments by Dr. Fürst, 157-58

    Extroversion, 288, 347, 391, 401-6, 437
      "           regressive, 288


    Familial associations, 120-32, 159

    "        constellations, influence of, 127

    Fanaticism, 283

    Fascination, 425-27

    Father, adaptation to, 127, 160, 175

    Father-complex, 270

    Faust analysed, 338-41, 384, 460-61

    Fear of unconscious, 434

    Fechner, 352

    Feeling-thoughts, 461

    Feelings of extrovert, 403-5
      "         introvert, 403-5

    Felida, case of, 84

    Féré, 12

    Feuerbach, 346

    Final view (Adler), 261

    Finck (types), 296

    Fixation, Freud's view of, 227
      "       infantile, 228, 462

    Flournoy, 60, 78, 199, 345-46
      "       case of Helen Smith, 69

    _Folie circulaire_, 67

    Forel, 70, 261

    Forel, _The Sexual Question_, 365

    Frank, 236, 245, 249

    Frazer, 413

    Freud, 59, 73, 82, 104, 132-33, 156, 170, 191, 227, 241, 281, 297-98,
      305-08, 319, 343-44, 349, 354-55, 359, 371, 373, 381, 404, 409,
      445, 458

    Freudian investigations, 133

    Freud's case of paranoid dementia, 336-37

    "       conception of dreams, 222

    "       method, 339

    "       psychology of dreams, 300

    "       publications, opposition to, 355

    "       theory, 261

    "        "      of infantile sexuality, 172

    Frobenius, 310, 436

    Function, adapted, 405
      "       co-, 405
      "       complexes, 426
      "       transcendental, 417, 436, 441, 468

    Fürst's experiments, 119, 157-58

    Future character (Felida), 84
      "        "     (Mary Reynolds), 84


    Gall, 315

    Genesis of dreams, 212

    Genius, 1

    Gley, 50

    Glossolalia, 89-91
      "          instances of, 28

    God-Almightiness, 450, 457, 462
      "        "      physical symptoms of, 458

    God's existence, 415

    "     idea, 451

    "     primitive concept of, 434

    "     projection of, 432

    Goethe, 12, 339, 384, 460-61
      "     psychic stimulation of, 75

    Gottähnlichkeit, 450

    Grandfathers I. and II. (Ivenes), 80

    Grebelskaja, 337

    Gross, 348
      "    (types), 296-97

    Guilt complex, association test, 107

    Guinon and Waltke, experiment of, 10, 47


    Hallucination, cryptomnesia, 91
      "            hypnosis in production of, 58

    _Hallucination téléologique_, 84

    Hallucinations, 11, 15, 49, 58, 282
      "             Helen Smith's, 63, 64
      "             hypnagogic, 13, 23, 62
      "             hypnopompic, 23, 62
      "             in somnambulism, 60
      "             intuitive, 64
      "             negative, 68

    Hallucinatory persons, why separated, 83

    Hans, little, 132

    Haôma, 413

    Hecker, 64

    Hedonism, viii

    Hegel, 290

    Heim, 412

    Heimarmenê, 413

    Herd-animal, man a, 263

    "   -soul, 455

    Hermeneutics, 468-69

    Hero, the, 462
      "   myth, 438

    Hiawatha, 436

    Hoch, 289

    Hoche, 355

    Hoefelt, spontaneous somnambulism, 66

    Homunculus, 404

    Homosexual tendencies, 165, 172, 420

    Hypermnesia (footnote), 86

    Hypnagogic activities, 23, 71, 204

    "          flashes, 22

    Hypnopompical dreams, 23

    Hypnosis in production of hallucination, 58

    Hypnotic treatment, 6, 237
      "        "        diametrically opposed to psychoanalysis, 207

    Hypnotism, essential character of, 243
      "        in automatic writing, 54, 56

    Hysteria, 1, 7
      "       case of, 385
      "       and extroversion, 406

    Hysteric, extreme sensibility of, 85

    Hysterical attack (Ivenes), ætiology of, 74
      "          "    induced by automatism, 79
      "        deafness and paralysis (Breuer), 356
      "        delirium, 71
      "        dissociation, 81, 287
      "        forgetfulness, 72

    Hysterical identification, 71
      "        somnambulism (case of Elise K.), 3

    Hystero-epilepsy (Janet), 81

    Hystero-epileptic attacks, 81

    Hystero-hypnosis (Ivenes), 79


    Idea, abstract, 438, 448

    Identification with collective psyche, 420-25, 462-65
    "               "   God, 337
    "               "   reason, 416

    Images, primordial, 410, 448
      "     psychic, 438

    Imitation, 456

    Imperialism, 399

    Impersonal unconscious, 437

    Importance of the unconscious, 278
    "            "    types, 348

    Incest-barrier, 230
    "     -wish, 462

    Individual, the, a changing identity, ix
      "         metaphysical needs of, 223

    Individuality, 473, 457, 465

    Individuation, 440, 456

    Infantile fixation, 228, 462
    "         milieu, influence of, 131
    "         transference, 298

    Infantility in primitive people, 230

    Inferiority, moral, 449

    Inspiration, 15

    Instances of dreams analysed, 217, 219

    Instinct-ego, 383

    Intelligence-complex, 114

    Interpolations in dreams, 176
      "            in rumour, 176
      "            _v._ analysis, 219

    Interpretation, causal reductive, 419
      "             objective, 421
      "             subjective, 421
      "             synthetic, 417

    Interpretation of Viennese school, one-sided, 217

    Introjection, 414

    Introversion, 137, 140, 288, 347, 391, 437, 401-3
      "           neurosis in child, 140

    Intuitive hallucinations, 64

    Itten, 337

    _Ivenes_, 33-34, 68-84
      "       journeys on other side, 34
      "       mystic character, 69
      "       oracular sayings, 36
      "       race-motherhood, 39


    James, William, 290-92, 401
      "      "      pragmatism, 348

    Janet, 46, 74, 81, 104, 232, 234, 452
      "    automatic writing (case of Lucie), 55
      "    Lucie and Léonie, 66
      "    Léonie, 69

    Janus face, 174

    Jeanne d'Arc, 63, 84
      "      "    visions of, 63

    Jonah, 436

    Jung, correspondence with Loy, 236-277


    K., Miss Elise, case of, 15

    Kadi, the, 390

    Kalk's case, 65

    Kant, 278, 303, 339

    Katatonic dementia præcox, 324
      "       negativism, 202

    Kern-complex, 228

    Kerner, 87, 88

    Kerner's book, 27, 35, 93
      "      _Prophetess of Prevorst_, 27, 69

    Kræpelin, 352

    Kraepelin-Aschaffenburg scheme, 157

    Kraft-Ebing, 7


    Lapses (case of S. W.), 20-23

    Laughter, symptomatic, 388

    Lebensgefühl, 462

    Legrand du Saulle, 66

    Lehmann, 50, 51

    Leibniz, 278

    Lethargy hysterical (Ivenes), 74
    "          "        (Loewenfeld), 76

    Let-instinct-live theory, 379

    Libido, 231, 347-48, 407, 471
      "     animal rôle of, 423-26
      "     canalisation of, 260, 274
      "     defined, 156, 288
      "     emanates from unconscious, 461
      "     stored-up, 234

    Life, archaic view of, x

    Life-lines psychological, 470, 474

    Literature of psychoanalysis, 154-55

    Little Anna, 132-54

    Little Hans, 132

    Loewenfeld, 74-76

    Longfellow, 436

    Loy's correspondence with Jung, 236-77

    Lumpf-theory, 147

    Lying, pathological, 15, 70, 71


    Macario, 64

    Macnish's case, 11

    Maeder, 337, 447

    Man a herd animal, 263, 269
    "   hylic, etc., 405

    Martian language (Helen Smith), 90

    Masculinity, unconscious, 420, 427

    Masochism, 165

    Materia medica of filth, 243-44

    Maury, 62

    Mayer, Robert, 231, 411

    Medical augur, 244

    Medium, S. W. as, 18

    Megalomania, 462

    Megarian school of philosophy, 402

    Melungu, 413

    Memory, bad, due to repression, 446

    Mental balance, 282

    Mental deficiency (neurasthenic), 14

    Mesnet's case, 10-11

    Metaphysical needs of individual, 223

    Metempsychosis, 413

    Method of association, 370

    Meynert, 316

    Mind the, a Becoming, 341
      "  collective, 451

    Mirror-writing, 54

    Misreading, 17, 46, 48

    Misunderstanding between types, 404

    Mithras, religion of, 366

    Moment, etiological, of neurosis, 405

    Monism psychological, 464

    Moral conflict, 225, 242, 247, 251

    Moral effect of analytical psychology, 375-76

    Mörchen, 14

    Mother, adaptation to, 125, 159, 171, 232

    Myers, automatic writing, 54

    Mysticism, 462

    Mystic science, S. W., 40-44

    Myth, the, 436
      "   unanimity of autochthonous forms, forms of, 451

    Mythology, 226


    Naef's case, 8

    Naïve and sentimental types, 294

    Nancy school, 356

    Nebuchadnezzar's dream discussed, 281

    Necessity, vital, ix, 375

    Negativism, 200-201
      "         causes of (Bleuler), 202
      "         katatonic, 202

    Negativism, schizophrenic, 200

    Nelken, 337

    Neumann, 353

    Neurasthenia, 1, 129

    Neurosis, 256, 370, 375
      "       ætiology of, 234
      "       and civilisation, 224, 374
      "       cause of, 232, 404
      "         "       outbreak of, 229
      "       counter-argument against husband, 129-31
      "       failure in adaptation, 234
      "       Freud's theory of, 227
      "       good effect of, 395
      "       introversion in child, 140
      "       no magical cures of, 470
      "       psychogenic in essence, 356
      "       sexual ætiology of, too narrow, 231
      "       the cause in present, 232
      "       used for power effects, 388

    Neurotic, a bearer of social ideals, 271, 277
      "       regressive tendency of, 469

    Neurotic's faith in authority, 268
      "        special task, 233

    Nietzsche, 87, 88, 295-96, 310, 326, 343, 378, 381, 393, 414, 417, 470

    Nominalism, 402

    Non-ego, 416, 434

    Nucleus-complex, 228

    Number dreams, 292


    Objective interpretation on plane of, 421

    Occultism's premature conclusions, 85

    Occultist literature, gnostic systems, 93

    Œdipus-complex, 228, 232

    Opposition to Freud's publications, 355

    Ostwald, 292, 398, 402


    Pairs of opposites, 417, 452

    Paranoia, 128, 313

    Paranoid dementia, Freud's case, 336-37

    Parental duty to children, 153
    "        constellation, 160-75

    _Parties supérieures_ (Janet), 232, 452

    Pathological cheat, psychology of, 70
    "            dreaming of saints, 70

    Patient and doctor, personal relation, 216-219

    Patients' resistances, 117, 202-05, 216

    Perseveration, 106, 111

    Personality of doctor, 238, 243, 259

    Personal unconscious, 437, 448

    Persona, 457-66, 472

    Persuasion methods, 237

    Perversion, sexual, 447

    Phales, 183

    Phantasies, release of, 458, 447
      "         sexual, 228
      "         unifying function of, 468

    Phenomena, entoptic, 61
      "        of double consciousness as character formations, 84

    Philosophy world, 350

    Physical sensations as evidence of unconscious feelings, 405

    Physician as "father," 408

    Physician's own complexes, 243, 257

    Pick, 70, 71

    Pinel, 315

    Platonic school, 402

    Power, evaluation, 274
      "      "         (Adler), 340, 394

    Power standpoint, Adler on, viii, ix

    Predicate type, 125

    Predisposition to neurosis, 233, 359

    Press of ideas, 203

    Preyer, 51

    Primitive non-differentiation, 453

    Primordial images, 410, 414, 448

    Prism, parable of, 252

    Problems of the day, sexual, 276, 367-77

    Projection, 427-33
      "         on doctor, 273, 407-8
      "         of phantasies on to parents, 409
      "         to religions, 435

    Prophetess of Prevorst, 27, 37, 69, 91-93

    Proust's case, 9-11

    Prudishness, 154
      "          case of, 119

    Pseudologia phantastica, 72

    Pseudological representation, 71

    Psyche, collective, 431, 455, 458, 472

    Psychic images, 438
    "       life of child, 132-56
    "       material unconscious, 279

    Psychoanalysis a high moral task, 235
    "              defined, 206, 256
    "              literature of, 154-55
    "              prejudices against, 206-07
    "              technique of, 257

    Psychoanalyst, education of, 244, 258, 266

    Psychocatharsis, 237

    Psychographic communications, 25

    Psychological disturbances, new theory of, 404
    "             ego and non-ego, 434
    "             realities, consolation of, 435

    Psychological types, study of, 287-98, 391

    Psychology, deep (Bleuler), 354
      "         of dreams, 299-311
      "         of individual, 464
      "         of pathological cheat, 70
      "         of rumour, 176

    Puberty, changes in character at, 67
      "      dreams of, 74, 178
      "      of psychopathic, 68
      "      somnambulic attacks at, 84
      "      want of balance at, 45


    Race-motherhood (Ivenes), 39

    Rapport effective with hysterics, 81, 287

    Rationalism, 431, 464
      "          antithesis of, 416

    Reaction-times, 98-102
      "     -type, 157
      "       "    hysterical, 97
      "       "    normal, 96

    Realism, 402

    Reasoning method of Dubois, 208

    Reconstruction of life, 236

    Reflection, power of, 397

    Regression, 230, 232, 469

    Regressive extroversion, 288
    "          introversion, 289

    Reincarnation (Ivenes), 37-9

    Renaudin's case, _Folie circulaire_, 67

    Repressed contents to be retained in consciousness, 447
    "         thoughts, independent growth of, 82

    Repression, 446
        "       new edition of, 461

    Reproduction experiment, 116

    Resistances, patients', 117, 202-05, 216
        "        productive of distortion, 285

    Revenge, unconscious, 190

    Revolution, French, 431

    Reynolds, Mary, case of (change of character), 65

    Ribot, 66

    Richer, 66

    Richet, 92
      "     definition of somnambulism, 49

    Rieger, 66

    Riegl, 293

    Riklin, 149

    Rumour, case of, 176
      "     interpolations in, 176
      "     not conscious invention, 178


    S. W., case of, 16-45

    Saints, pathological dreaming of, 70

    Sallust, 231

    Schiller, 294

    Schisms, 453

    Schizophrenia, 201, 312, 447, 459
      "            Bleuler's summary, 203

    Schizophrenic introversion, 204
    "             splitting, 201

    Scholasticism, 340, 352, 373

    School, Megarian _v._ Platonic, 402
      "     the Nancy, 356
      "      "  Valentinian, 405
      "      "  Zürich, 355

    Schoolmaster view, 264

    Schopenhauer, 295, 368, 447-48

    Schreber case, 337, 343, 346, 440

    Schüle, 61

    Semiotics, vii, 468

    Semi-somnambulic states, 23

    Semi-somnambulism (S. W.), 23, 37, 48-9

    Sexual enlightenment of children, 152, 247
    "      morality, 380
    "      perversion, 447
    "      phantasies, 228
    "      problems of the day, 277, 367-77

    _Sexual question_, Forel, 365

    Sexual surrogates, 172

    Sexuality, importance of infantile, 172
      "        primitive man's view of, 306

    Sexualisation of thought, 204

    Significance of the father, 156
      "          "       "      case 1  160
      "          "       "       "   2  162
      "          "       "       "   3  165
      "          "       "       "   4  170
    "            of number dreams, 191

    Slips of tongue, 179

    Smith, Helen, case of, 61, 63-64, 72, 91

    Socrates, 332, 374

    Somnambulic attacks, S. W., 28
      "           "      origin of, 75
    "           dialogues, 18
    "           personalities, 30-33

    Somnambulism, 2, 8, 16, 18, 240

    Somnambulist's suggestibility, 92
      "          thought in plastic images, 60

    Spielrein, 337

    Standpoint, causal, final, viii

    Stanley Hall, Dr., 94

    Star-dwellers, 35, 36

    Stekel, 191, 259, 261

    Stereotypic acts, 282

    Stimulus word, 101
      "       "    repetition of, 105

    Study of psychological types, 287-98, 391-403

    Subconscious personality, how constructed, 55
    "            personalities, Grandfather I. and II., 80

    Subjective interpretation of dreams, 421
    "          roots of dreams, 73

    Sublimation, 140, 397-99

    Sucking as sexual act, 231

    Suggestibility, influence of darkness on, 59
      "             somnambulist's, 92

    Suggestion, analysis not a method of, 207
      "         by analyst, 261, 265, 266, 456, 469

    Superman, 414

    Super-personal unconscious, 426

    Superstition, scientific dread of, 211
      "           unconscious, 280

    Swedenborg, 37
      "         visions of, 63

    Symbol interpreted semiotically, vii, 468
    "      not fixed, 218, 221, 265, 308
    "      psychological, two aspects of, viii
    "      value of religious, xi

    Symbolic meaning of sexual phantasies, 222

    Symbolism, 198, 224, 337
      "        an experience, 222
      "        book of Tobias, 174
      "        chestnuts, meaning of, 183
      "        God and devil, 174
      "        of dreams, 59, 218, 308
      "        value of religious, 224

    Sympathy (extraversion), 293

    Symptomatic acts, 46, 179, 281
      "         laughter, 388

    Synesius, 417

    Synthetic procedure, 417

    Systematic anæsthesia, 68


    Table movements, 85

    Table-turning, 17, 24, 50

    Tachypnoea (case of S. W.), 19

    Taylor, 413

    Teleology, meaning in double consciousness, 84

    Telepathic thought-reading, 266

    Tender-minded and tough-minded, 290, 402

    Theories new, as caustics, 394
      "       "   of psychogenic disturbances, 404
      "       "   reductive, 394

    Thought of extroverts, 403

    Thought-feelings, 411, 461

    Thought-pressure, 204

    Thought-reading, 85-92

    Thought, somnambulic, in plastic images, 60
      "      transference, 24, 51, 56

    Till Eulenspiegel, 387

    Tongue, slips of, 179

    Tower of Babel, 446

    Transcendental function, 417, 436, 441

    Transference, 245-46, 270, 289, 407-13, 429, 435
      "           infantile, 298
      "           positive and negative, 270-72

    Trauma, sexual, 227, 242, 358, 361-62
      "     theory (Charcot), 361

    Trumbull Ladd, 62

    Truth, what is it, 252, 256

    Twilight states, 71, 81

    Type, complex, 114
      "   definition, 114
      "   extroverted, 288, 391, 439, 401
      "   introverted, 288, 391, 439, 401
      "   objective, 11
      "   predicate, 115

    Types (Finck), 296
      "   (Gross), 296-97
      "   importance of, 348
      "   marriages between, 402
      "   naïve and sentimental, 294
      "   psychological, 287, 391, 439, 401

    Tough and tender-minded, 290

    Typical themes of dreams, 310


    Unconscious, absolute, 435
      "          analysable to a finish, 461
      "          an extension of the individual, vi
      "          assimilation of, 449
      "          compensation, 284
      "          cannot be emptied, 447
      "          cause of neurosis, 404
      "          feelings as physical sensations, 405
      "          homosexuality, 420
      "          impersonal, 437, 472
      "          importance of the, 278
      "          personal, 437, 448, 456, 472
      "          personalities (Ivenes), 77
      "          prospective aspect of, 442
      "          psychic material, 279
      "          source of libido, 461
      "             "   "  wisdom, 442
      "          superstition, 280
      "          uprush of, 459

    Understanding, prospective, 338, 442

    Understanding, retrospective, 338

    Unifying function of phantasies, 468


    Value of religious symbolism, 224

    "Values," 392, 396, 404

    Viennese school, one-sided interpretations of, 217

    Vices and virtues, collective, 453

    Virtues, unconscious counterparts, 389

    Vischer, 348-49

    Visions, Benvenuto Cellini, 63
      "      hypnagogic, 63, 71
      "      of Jeanne d'Arc, 63
      "      of S. W., 21
      "      of Swedenborg, 63

    Visual images, 60
      "    _v._ auditory hallucinations, 61

    "Vital necessity," ix

    Voisin, 66

    Volitional meaning of dreams, 222


    Wagner, 383

    Wandering impulse, cases of, 9

    War, vi, xi, 398, 399, 416

    Warringer, 293-94

    Washing mania, 246

    Wernicke, 316

    Westphal, 13

    Will, 397-99
      "   to power, 381, 388, 458

    Wisdom of unconscious, 442

    Wish-phantasies, 447

    Witch-sleep, 75

    Word predicate, type defined, 158

    Word-presentation, 53

    Works of the Zürich school, 345-46

    World-philosophy, 350

    Wundt, 352


    Zarathustra, 381

    Zagreus, 417

    Zschokke, 92

    Zürich school, 355
      "      "     works of, 345-46

       *       *       *       *       *

THE END

_Baillière, Tindall & Cox, 8, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, W.C._

       *       *       *       *       *
  +----------------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                                      |
  |                     Transcriber notes:                               |
  |                                                                      |
  | P.XXI. 'C. C.' changed to 'C. G.'.                                   |
  | P.22. 'Occasionlly' typo for 'Occasionally', changed.                |
  | P.23. 'third kind of taste' changed 'taste' to 'state'.              |
  | P.72. 'Our patent develops', 'patent' changed to 'patient'.          |
  | P.103. added '+ denotes' in footnote 9 for multiple footnote.        |
  | P.201. 'Pyschology' typo for 'Psychology', changed.                  |
  | P.217. 'unnecessary' typo for 'unnecessary', changed.                |
  | P.305. Freud's view-point of casuality', changed  'casuality' to     |
  |        'causality'.                                                  |
  | P.340. 'beween' typo for 'between', changed.                         |
  | P.345. Placed footnote anchor after 'mythological formations',       |
  |         but could be elsewhere on the page. It may be an independant |
  |         reference to the whole section.                              |
  | P.384. 'castastrophe' typo for 'catastrophe', changed.               |
  | P.451. 'colective' typo for 'collective', changed.                   |
  | P.471. 'devolopment' typo for 'development' changed.                 |
  | P.482. in index, 'Hommunculus' is 'Homunculus' in the book, changed. |
  | Fixed various punctuation.                                           |
  | Underscore before and after _text_ indicates italics.                |
  |                                                                      |
  +----------------------------------------------------------------------+






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLECTED PAPERS ON ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.